Seesaw: Accelerating Training by Balancing Learning Rate and Batch Size Scheduling Report GitHub Issue × Title: Content selection saved. Describe the issue below: Description: Submit without GitHub Submit in GitHub arXiv is now an independent nonprofit! Learn more × Back to arXiv Why HTML? Report Issue Back to Abstract Download PDF Abstract 1 Introduction 1.1 Theoretical Contributions 1.2 Empirical Contributions 2 Related Work Role of batch size in scaling. SGD for linear regression. Stochastic Differential Equations (SDEs). Empirical work. 3 Seesaw: Algorithmic Details 3.1 Extension to Normalized SGD 3.2 Achievable Speedups 4 Empirical Findings Model and dataset. Experimental design. 4.1 Can We Do Better? 4.2 When Does Assumption Fail? 5 Theoretical Analysis Setup and notation. 5.1 Main Results 6 Discussion and Conclusions References A Proofs for Section A.1 Preliminaries A.2 Proofs of Main Statements Upper bound. Lower bound. B Normalized SGD analysis Analyzing the gradients First term Second term B.1 How Aggressive Can the Scheduler Be? C Weight Decay D Comparison to other schedulers E Auxiliary Losses License: CC BY 4.0 arXiv:2510.14717v2 [cs.LG] 27 Jul 2026 Seesaw: Accelerating Training by Balancing Learning Rate and Batch Size Scheduling Alexandru Meterez Affiliation: Harvard University Affiliation: Kempner Institute at Harvard University Depen Morwani Affiliation: Harvard University Affiliation: Kempner Institute at Harvard University Jingfeng Wu Affiliation: University of California, Berkeley Costin-Andrei Oncescu Affiliation: Harvard University Cengiz Pehlevan Affiliation: Harvard University Affiliation: Kempner Institute at Harvard University Sham Kakade Affiliation: Harvard University Affiliation: Kempner Institute at Harvard University Abstract Increasing the batch size during training — a “batch ramp” — is a promising strategy to accelerate large language model pretraining. While for SGD, doubling the batch size can be equivalent to halving the learning rate, the optimal strategy for adaptive optimizers like Adam is less clear. As a result, any batch-ramp scheduling, if used at all, is typically tuned heuristically. This work develops a principled framework for batch-size scheduling and introduces Seesaw : whenever a standard scheduler would halve the learning rate, Seesaw instead multiplies it by and doubles the batch size, preserving loss dynamics while reducing serial steps. Theoretically, we provide, to our knowledge, the first finite-sample proof of equivalence between learning-rate decay and batch-size ramp-up for SGD on noisy linear regression, and we extend this equivalence to normalized SGD, a tractable proxy for Adam, under a variance-dominated regime observed in practice. Empirically, on 150M/300M/600M-parameter models trained at Chinchilla scale using a constant (critical) batch size, Seesaw matches cosine decay at equal FLOPs while reducing wall-clock time by , approaching the theoretical limit implied by our analysis. 1 Introduction † † footnotetext: ⋆ : Equal contribution. Correspondence to: ameterez@g.harvard.edu, dmorwani@g.harvard.edu Code is available at: https://github.com/alexandrumeterez/seesaw In recent years, large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable progress across diverse tasks, including outperforming humans in competitive benchmarks and international competitions ( Huang and Yang, 2025 ; Petrov et al., 2025 ; El-Kishky et al., 2025 ) . A central driver of this progress has been the steady increase in pre-training compute ( Kaplan et al., 2020 ; Hoffmann et al., 2022 ) . However, hardware improvements have not kept pace with the rapid escalation of training requirements, resulting in wall-clock times extending to several months for state-of-the-art models ( Erdil and Schneider-Joseph, 2024 ) . A widely studied strategy to reduce wall clock time is increasing the batch size ( You et al., 2017 ; Goyal et al., 2017 ) . Empirical studies show that larger batches can proportionally reduce the number of optimization steps required for convergence ( Zhang et al., 2024 ; McCandlish et al., 2018 ; Shallue et al., 2019 ) , while maintaining comparable per-step runtime through parallelization. However, beyond a maximum batch size termed as critical batch size (CBS), further scaling reduces sample efficiency and limits gains in training speed. While most prior work focuses on training with a fixed batch size, recent large-scale LLM training runs employ batch size schedules that gradually increase batch size over the course of training ( Dubey et al., 2024 ; Touvron et al., 2023 ; Adler et al., 2024 ; OLMo et al., 2024 ; Team, 2025 ) . This practice has been observed to further reduce training times without compromising model performance. However, to the best of our knowledge, the “batch ramp” schedules are not theoretically grounded and instead tuned heuristically. The lack of theoretical justification leaves open whether these heuristics are close to optimal, motivating the central question of our study: what is the optimal batch size schedule for minimizing serial runtime while not sacrificing performance? 1.1 Theoretical Contributions We theoretically prove, to the best our knowledge, the first non-asymptotic equivalence result between learning rate decay and batch size ramp up in SGD in linear regression with additive noise. Further, we extend our equivalence result to normalized SGD (considered a proxy for Adam), leading to the batch size scheduling algorithm Seesaw (Algorithm 1 ). We introduce an informal version of our main theorem here, as well as the corollary leading up to Seesaw, and we formalize the statements in Section 5 . Theorem (Informal version of Theorem 1 ) . Consider a base SGD process that runs for phases, using a fixed learning rate throughout, while the batch size doubles after each phase. Now consider an alternative process where the batch size is fixed but the learning rate halves after each phase, and where each phase processes the same number of data points as in the base process. Then, the excess risk of the base process is within a constant factor of that of the alternative process. Corollary (Informal version of Corollary 1 ) . Consider a base normalized SGD process (Equation 4 ) that runs for phases, where the batch size doubles after each phase while the learning rate decays by a factor of . Consider an alternative normalized SGD process where the batch size is fixed but the learning rate halves after each phase, and where each phase processes the same number of data points as in the base process. Then, the excess risk of the base process is within a constant factor of that of the alternative process. 1.2 Empirical Contributions Based on the theoretical analysis, we introduce Seesaw (Algorithm 1 ), a learning rate and batch size scheduler that reduces the serial runtime of LLM pre-training runs by approximately via increasing the batch size during training at specific points. We provide empirical results in Figure 1 and show that at (or below) the critical batch size, our method achieves a significant serial runtime acceleration across several model and data scales, while maintaining the same performance as training with cosine decay. We also empirically show that Seesaw also works even when using AdamW with tuned weight decay in Figure 4 of Appendix C , making Seesaw a practical solution for reducing the wall-clock time of LLM pretraining. Figure 1: Seesaw comparison with cosine decay in 150M (left), 300M (middle) and 600M (right) models trained at Chinchilla scale. Seesaw matches the loss dynamics of cosine annealing in FLOPs (top row), but achieves a significant speed up in terms of serial runtime (bottom row). Runs are swept over learning rates and plotted at the best learning rate for cosine annealing in terms of validation loss, at each batch size. The validation losses at the end of training are provided in Table 1 . Note that both the token and step axes are linear. For more experimental details, see Section 1 . 2 Related Work Role of batch size in scaling. Understanding batch size ramp up schemes during training has been a topic of interest in recent years due to its crucial role in decreasing wall clock runtime. Various methods of increasing the batch size have been used in common LLMs such as LLaMA ( Dubey et al., 2024 ; Touvron et al., 2023 ) , Nemotron ( Adler et al., 2024 ) , OLMo ( OLMo et al., 2024 ; Groeneveld et al., 2024 ) , Apertus ( Team, 2025 ) . The reason behind ramping up the batch size is to take advantage of the parallel computation of samples and thus reducing the total number of sequential steps. However, since increasing the batch size reduces the total number of gradient steps taken by the model during training, there is a maximal batch size which can be achieved without becoming data inefficient, called the critical batch size (CBS) ( Erdil and Schneider-Joseph, 2024 ; Jain et al., 2018 ; Zhang et al., 2024 ; Shallue et al., 2019 ) . Recent work also looks at the effect of batch size on SGD optimization in LLMs ( Srećković et al., 2025 ; Marek et al., 2025 ) , following previously established theoretical results in noisy quadratic models ( Zhang et al., 2019 ) . SGD for linear regression. Recently, Zhang et al. (2024) have analyzed the CBS using weight averaging in linear regression and established scaling laws as a function of data and model size. The bias-variance analysis used by Zhang et al. (2024) has a longstanding history in the literature ( Jain et al., 2017 ) and has been used to study batch ramp-up schemes in SGD ( Jain et al., 2018 ) . These rates have been recently made tight by ( Zou et al., 2021 ; Wu et al., 2022a ; Wu et al., 2022b ) for general spectra of the data covariance. Recently, ( Meterez et al., 2025 ) have used a simplified mathematical framework for rederiving the same bounds by rotating the dynamics in the eigenbasis of the data. A similar diagonalizing idea has also been previously used in literature by Bordelon and Pehlevan (2021) ; Wu et al. (2023b) ; Wu et al. (2023a) . Stochastic Differential Equations (SDEs). Another point of view for studying the interaction between batch size and learning rate in optimization is through SDEs ( Li et al., 2021 ; Xie et al., 2020 ; Compagnoni et al., 2024 ; Jastrzębski et al., 2017 ) . Malladi et al. (2022) study how to scale the learning rate as a function of the batch size in adaptive algorithms, extending previous work that introduced the square root scaling rule ( Granziol et al., 2022 ; You et al., 2019 ) . Empirical work. Scaling laws for the CBS and the optimal batch size have also been recently observed by ( Bergsma et al., 2025 ) . In line with our conclusions regarding SGD, the linear scaling rule for SGD has been observed by ( Smith et al., 2017 ) , showing that in SGD, linearly increasing the batch size is equivalent to decreasing the learning rate. McCandlish et al. (2018) propose a metric based on the Hessian and the noise that correlates with the CBS over training. While their proposed metric is based on having access to the Hessian, which is prohibitive for current large-scale runs, they find that the noise scale increases during a training run, which aligns with our theoretical predictions. Lastly, perhaps the most similar to our work is Merrill et al. (2025) , who propose a batch size warmup scheme based on starting from a checkpoint with various multiples of the current batch size, and pick the largest where the loss is -close to the original loss. Based on this methodology, they propose the scaling rule and . In contrast, we propose a simple drop-in replacement for existing cosine schedulers, motivated rigorously by (normalized) SGD on quadratics. Moreover, we argue that the scheduler proposed by ( Merrill et al., 2025 ) will lead to instabilities and divergence after a fixed number of steps, based on our theoretical analysis in Lemma 4 . 3 Seesaw: Algorithmic Details We begin by providing an intuitive derivation of Seesaw, and the practical implementation of our algorithm. To build intuition, consider different SGD processes. In one process we take steps at learning rate and batch size , and in the other we take step at learning rate and batch size . Consider a general smooth loss function and let . Then, through a simple Taylor expansion up to first order in , we have the loss of the process and the loss of the half step process respectively: Note that the processes are equivalent up to first order both in the deterministic part and in the noise terms up to , an argument which has been previously shown by Malladi et al. (2022) . We formalize this SGD intuition in Theorem 1 and extend it to normalized SGD as an analytical proxy to Adam in Corollary 1 . 3.1 Extension to Normalized SGD From the previous subsection, intuitively, for SGD, cutting the learning rate by a factor of should be equivalent to increasing the batch size by a factor of . To design a practical training algorithm based on the SGD analysis and arrive at Seesaw, we begin with the Adam update rule and simplify until we obtain normalized SGD (NSGD), which is a commonly used tractable analytical proxy for Adam ( Jelassi et al., 2022 ; Zhao et al., 2024 ; Xie et al., 2024 ) . Suppose we are optimizing over parameters and denote the gradients at each time step . Then, for learning rate and ignoring the bias correction, the parameter update for Adam is given by: (1) (2) (3) where is the momentum term, is the second moment term, are their respective exponential decay rates, and ensures stability. For NSGD, we approximate the per-coordinate preconditioner of Adam will a single scalar preconditioner, set and replace the denominator with the true expected value of the squared gradient norms over the population: (4) Algorithm 1 Seesaw Inputs: (initial learning rate), (initial batch size), (step decay factor), (an array of steps at which input scheduler cuts by ), (total training steps) , for to do if then ; ; end if end for Equation 4 describes the NSGD update rule, which is a crucial component of designing Seesaw. While the full analysis is deferred to Appendix B , the expected gradient norms can be decomposed as: (5) where the variance scales down with the batch size. To design Seesaw, we assume that the dominates the expected gradient squared norms (Assumption 2 ), and we motivate why this assumption is reasonable in Appendix B . This step reduces (up to constant factors) the NSGD update rule to SGD with a rescaled learning rate (Equation 11 ), allowing us to extend risk equivalence to NSGD (Corollary 1 ) in Section 5 . For NSGD, informally, Corollary 1 shows that any learning rate cut by a factor of and batch size increase by a factor of are equivalent as long as is held constant. We further empirically comapre Seesaw with other possible schedulers in Figure 5 . 3.2 Achievable Speedups While our theory is established for step decay schedulers, in practice we approximate cosine decay with a step decay by considering a decay of , and passing the times (as measured in tokens) where the cosine would cut the learning rate by as input to Seesaw. Then, at these points, we instead cut the learning rate by and increase the batch size by , where the schedulers are equivalent in terms of loss as long as we keep the product fixed. However, we cannot arbitrarily increase the batch size at time and expect the risk to match the underlying process. Lemma 4 quantifies this and the main takeaway is stated below: Remark 1 . The most aggressive ramp up scheme we can use is given by . (for a formal argument see Lemma 4 ) In Section 4.1 we empirically verify this constraint and show that is the most aggressive scheme we can choose without divergence. The corresponding algorithm is provided in Algorithm 1 . At the most aggressive limit, we can compute the theoretical speedup we would hope to achieve where the standard scheduler is the cosine decay. Lemma 1 (Maximum Theoretical Speedup under Cosine Decay) . Consider a baseline training process of total steps using a constant batch size and a cosine learning rate schedule . An equivalent process run with a batch ramping schedule like Seesaw, in the continuous limit 1 1 1 In the continuous-time limit, we consider an aggressive (non-divergent) batch size ramp that maintains the relationship . Consequently, the total number of sequential steps is given by the integral of the normalized learning rate schedule: . , will have a total of steps. This yields a maximum theoretical serial runtime reduction of . Lemma 1 provides an upper bound on the acceleration from Seesaw . In Figure 1 , we can indeed see that the total number of steps are reduced approximately by as predicted. 4 Empirical Findings In this section, we present the experimental details and methodology for evaluating Seesaw. We denote by the dataset size, the number of parameters. B=128 B=256 B=512 B=1024 150M (cosine) 3.0282 3.0353 3.0696 3.1214 150M (Seesaw) 3.0208 3.0346 3.0687 3.1318 300M (cosine) 2.8531 2.8591 2.8696 2.9369 300M (Seesaw) 2.8452 2.8561 2.8700 2.9490 600M (cosine) - 2.6904 2.6988 2.7128 600M (Seesaw) - 2.6883 2.6944 2.7132 Table 1: Final validation losses picked at the best learning rate (for the cosine annealing scheduler) for each batch size, for . Note that the dynamics match robustly across the schedulers when trained at CBS. Model and dataset. We pretrain models of size 150M, 300M and 600M (non-embedding) parameters at Chinchilla scaling i.e. ( Hoffmann et al., 2022 ) . We use the OLMo ( Groeneveld et al., 2024 ) codebase to train all of our models. For each experiment, we do learning rate warmup for of the total amount of tokens, followed by learning rate decay following cosine scheduling or Seesaw. We report the architectural details of each model as a tuple (depth, heads, width), and thus we have for 150M , 300M and for 600M . Unless mentioned otherwise, each model is trained using AdamW, with weight decay (with the exception of the weight decay experiments in Appendix C , where we sweep over ), , , . For each run we sweep over learning rates and initial batch sizes , at sequence length . Similar to the OLMo training codebase, we enable z-loss during training, but provide ablations over it in Appendix E showing that it does not affect the model performance at our scales. All our models are pretrained on the C4 dataset ( Raffel et al., 2020 ) , tokenized with the T5 tokenizer. Experimental design. We compare Seesaw with cosine annealing by training models at the critical batch size (CBS) , approximated based on ( Zhang et al., 2024 ) , namely (150M), (300M) and (600M) tokens. The main results comparing Seesaw and cosine annealing at equal FLOPs are provided in Figure 1 . The precise final losses obtained by the 2 schedulers are provided in Table 1 . 4.1 Can We Do Better? Recall that based on Corollary 1 and Lemma 4 , we have a family of equivalent schedules in NSGD, given by a fixed product , under the constraint that . Ideally, we would like to make as large as possible, since this would lead to larger batch sizes, and thus assuming enough devices are available, the lowest serial runtime. Crucially, the constraint prevents us from using a too agressive batch size scheduler. In this section, we empirically verify our theoretical prediction by testing schedulers positioned at various points on the axis. Table 2: values used to test the extreme values of the equivalence. Namely, we train 150M models at fixed batch size and Chinchilla scale, and we approximate cosine decay with a step decay scheduler that halves the learning rate at the token counts where the cosine schedule’s learning rate would halve. This gives us the baseline and , with the product . Based on the theoretical constraint and the equivalence line, the most aggressive scheduler we could use is and . To validate our hypothesis, we compare with and , and points in between at geometric intervals. Table 2 gives an overview of the experimental design, and Figure 2 shows that indeed the most aggressive schedules tend to underperform. Figure 2: 150M models trained at batch size 256 (left) and 512 (right) with and values following the line of equivalence described in Table 2 . Note that the target to match is the blue trace, and our theory (Lemma 4 ) predicts that the red and purple traces should not match the baseline (blue trace) due to instabilities. 4.2 When Does Assumption 2 Fail? Up to this point, a crucial assumption for the development of our theory and the design of Seesaw has been Assumption 2 . Recall that Assumption 2 states that the expected gradient norms – namely, the denominator of the NSGD update step, is dominated by the additive noise. Intuitively, since the noise variance decreases with the batch size as , one can see that past a certain batch the additive noise will become small, and thus Assumption 2 will fail. In Figure 3 , we can see that at sufficiently large batch sizes, indeed Seesaw starts to perform worse as compared to the underlying cosine schedule. Figure 3: 150M models trained past CBS (roughly 256), at batch sizes 1024, 2048, 4096 and 8192, for 3 schedulers: cosine decay (blue), constant learning rate with increasing batch size based on Seesaw (orange) and Seesaw (green). Note that none of the proposed schedules is able to match the cosine curve, with the discrepancy increasing as the batch size grows more. The first hypothesis could be that it is still possible to match the underlying schedule, but with a learning rate equivalence as given by dominating in the denominator. As does not scale with batch size, therefore, using the equivalence schedule of SGD could be a promising candidate. We explore this option in Figure 3 , and it turns out that this schedule performs even worse than the Seesaw schedule. We hypothesise that beyond a certain batch size, it is not possible to match the performance of learning rate decay by any equivalent batch size ramp up for Adam or normalized SGD, which we motivate using the following toy example. For simplicity, we look at NGD (normalized gradient descent) in 1D, for the quadratic loss , where and . Training with NGD, we have the loss gradients with respect to the parameters and the update rule: where . Note that if , then and if , then , implying that the model does not reach the minimizer and instead converges to a stable cycle of around the minimizer. In order to escape this stable cycle and reach the minimizer, it is thus necessary to decay the learning rate. Therefore, if we slightly relax the setup and think of large batch training as being close to NGD regime, we can see that further increasing the batch size does not change the dynamics. Therefore, past a certain batch size, learning rate decay is crucial for achieving a lower loss with NGD. 5 Theoretical Analysis In this section we introduce the main theoretical contributions of our work. Namely, under mild assumptions, we establish a formal equivalence between learning rate decay and batch size ramp up in SGD and normalized SGD. Setup and notation. We use the notation to mean that there exists some constant such that for any . We also use the notation if for all . We denote the samples where and , with the distribution and risk: where the expectation is over the , is the minimizer, and is the variance of the additive noise. We also use to denote the risk at time for a process trained with , but we drop the parameter when it is clear from context. We consider step decay schedules for the learning rate, where, the learning rate in the phase is denoted by and denotes the total number of data samples used in the phase. Similarly, for batch ramp schedules, denotes the batch size in the phase. For discussion, we will use the bias-variance decomposition terminology of risk ( Jain et al., 2018 ; Jain et al., 2017 ; Zou et al., 2021 ; Wu et al., 2022a ; Wu et al., 2022b ; Meterez et al., 2025 ) . Informally, bias corresponds to the risk of the averaged iterates, while variance corresponds to the noise in the iterates, and . We will denote the stochastic gradient at time by and let represent its expected squared norm under the population distribution. 5.1 Main Results In this section, we first introduce the main assumptions and discuss their implications, followed by the main theoretical results. Our first assumption states that the risk of the SGD process is bounded. Assumption 1 (Bounded risk.) . Consider a SGD process with a given scheduling scheme for the batch size and learning rate. Let denote the first time when the scheduler changes either the learning rate or the batch size. Then, we assume that there exists a constant such that for all . In general, we expect every “well tuned” scheduler to start cutting when , as we want to minimize the bias component of the risk before cutting down the learning rate to reduce noise in the iterates. Moreover, for a well-behaved schedule, as we expect the risk to decrease over time, this condition should hold throughout the process. Our second assumption states that the expected gradient squared norms of the NSGD update rule are dominated by the additive noise term. Assumption 2 (Variance dominated.) . Assume that . Under Assumption 2 , the NSGD process effectively reduces to SGD with a rescaled learning rate (Equation 11 ), up to constant factors. Based on the previously established assumptions, we can now state the equivalence result. We use the notation to denote the risk at time of an SGD process trained with the learning rate scheduler and batch size scheduler . Theorem 1 (SGD Equivalence) . Fix , , and parameters , with . Define the two phase-indexed schedules and run two SGD procedures in phases so that, in phase , each procedure processes the same number of samples (possibly depending on ) under its respective schedule. Let and denote the (population) risk of the two procedures at the end of phase . If Assumption 1 holds (for both procedures) with constant , then where denotes the risk of the second procedure when its entire learning-rate schedule is multiplied by a uniform factor , and means for a numerical constant depending only on (and absolute constants). We defer the full proof to Appendix A.1 . Now, we extend this result to Normalized SGD. Under Assumption 2 , NSGD reduces to SGD with a rescaled learning rate (Equation 11 ). Consequently, we can extend Theorem 1 to the normalized SGD case. We formalize this in the following corollary: Corollary 1 (Normalized SGD Equivalence) . Fix , , and parameters , with . Define the two phase-indexed schedules and run two normalized SGD procedures in phases so that, in phase , each procedure processes the same number of samples (possibly depending on ) under its respective schedule. Let and denote the (population) risk of the two procedures at the end of phase . If Assumption 1 and 2 holds (for both procedures) with constant , then where denotes the risk of the second procedure when its entire learning-rate schedule is multiplied by a uniform factor , and means for a numerical constant depending only on (and absolute constants). 6 Discussion and Conclusions In this work, we provide a rigorous analysis of batch ramp through the lens of noisy linear regression, offering theoretical insight into a practice that has thus far been guided largely by empirical heuristics. Building upon this analysis, we introduce Seesaw (Algorithm 1 ), a principled batch size scheduling algorithm that can serve as a drop-in replacement for commonly used learning-rate schedules in adaptive optimizers such as Adam. Our empirical evaluation demonstrates that Seesaw matches the performance of standard cosine annealing schedules while reducing the serial training runtime by approximately . These results indicate that dynamically balancing the learning rate and batch size provides an effective means to accelerate training without compromising performance. Acknowledgements AM would like to thank Jacob Zavatone-Veth and Alex Damian for helpful discussions. The authors would also like to thank Max Shad and Bala Desinghu for their help with the cluster. AM, DM acknowledge the support of a Kempner Institute Graduate Research Fellowship. CP is supported by an NSF CAREER Award (IIS-2239780), DARPA grants DIAL-FP-038 and AIQ-HR00112520041, the Simons Collaboration on the Physics of Learning and Neural Computation, and the William F. Milton Fund from Harvard University. AM, SK and DM acknowledge that this work has been made possible in part by a gift from the Chan Zuckerberg Initiative Foundation to establish the Kempner Institute for the Study of Natural and Artificial Intelligence. SK and DM acknowledge support from the Office of Naval Research under award N0001422-1-2377 and the National Science Foundation Grant under award #IIS 2229881. DM is also supported by a Simons Investigator Fellowship, NSF grant DMS-2134157, DARPA grant W911NF2010021,and DOE grant DE-SC0022199. References Adler et al. (2024) B. Adler, N. Agarwal, A. Aithal, D. H. Anh, P. Bhattacharya, A. Brundyn, J. Casper, B. Catanzaro, S. Clay, J. Cohen, et al. Nemotron-4 340b technical report . arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.11704 . Cited by: §1 , §2 . Bergsma et al. (2025) S. Bergsma, N. Dey, G. Gosal, G. Gray, D. Soboleva, and J. Hestness Power lines: scaling laws for weight decay and batch size in llm pre-training . arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.13738 . Cited by: §2 . Bordelon and Pehlevan (2021) B. Bordelon and C. Pehlevan Learning curves for sgd on structured features . arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.02713 . Cited by: §2 . Compagnoni et al. (2024) E. M. Compagnoni, T. Liu, R. Islamov, F. N. Proske, A. Orvieto, and A. Lucchi Adaptive methods through the lens of sdes: theoretical insights on the role of noise . arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.15958 . Cited by: §2 . Dubey et al. (2024) A. Dubey, A. Jauhri, A. Pandey, A. Kadian, A. Al-Dahle, A. Letman, A. Mathur, A. Schelten, A. Yang, A. Fan, et al. The llama 3 herd of models . arXiv e-prints , pp. arXiv–2407 . Cited by: §1 , §2 . El-Kishky et al. (2025) A. El-Kishky, A. Wei, A. Saraiva, B. Minaiev, D. Selsam, D. Dohan, F. Song, H. Lightman, I. Clavera, J. Pachocki, et al. Competitive programming with large reasoning models . arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.06807 . Cited by: §1 . Erdil and Schneider-Joseph (2024) E. Erdil and D. Schneider-Joseph Data movement limits to frontier model training . arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.01137 . Cited by: §1 , §2 . Goyal et al. (2017) P. Goyal, P. Dollár, R. Girshick, P. Noordhuis, L. Wesolowski, A. Kyrola, A. Tulloch, Y. Jia, and K. He Accurate, large minibatch sgd: training imagenet in 1 hour . arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.02677 . Cited by: §1 . Granziol et al. (2022) D. Granziol, S. Zohren, and S. Roberts Learning rates as a function of batch size: a random matrix theory approach to neural network training . Journal of Machine Learning Research 23 ( 173 ), pp. 1–65 . Cited by: §2 . Groeneveld et al. (2024) D. Groeneveld, I. Beltagy, P. Walsh, A. Bhagia, R. Kinney, O. Tafjord, A. H. Jha, H. Ivison, I. Magnusson, Y. Wang, et al. Olmo: accelerating the science of language models . arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.00838 . Cited by: §2 , §4 . Hoffmann et al. (2022) J. Hoffmann, S. Borgeaud, A. Mensch, E. Buchatskaya, T. Cai, E. Rutherford, D. d. L. Casas, L. A. Hendricks, J. Welbl, A. Clark, et al. Training compute-optimal large language models . arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.15556 . Cited by: §1 , §4 . Huang and Yang (2025) Y. Huang and L. F. Yang Gemini 2.5 pro capable of winning gold at imo 2025 . arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.15855 . Cited by: §1 . Jain et al. (2017) P. Jain, S. M. Kakade, R. Kidambi, P. Netrapalli, V. K. Pillutla, and A. Sidford A markov chain theory approach to characterizing the minimax optimality of stochastic gradient descent (for least squares) . arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.09430 . Cited by: §2 , §5 . Jain et al. (2018) P. Jain, S. M. Kakade, R. Kidambi, P. Netrapalli, and A. Sidford Parallelizing stochastic gradient descent for least squares regression: mini-batching, averaging, and model misspecification . Journal of machine learning research 18 ( 223 ), pp. 1–42 . Cited by: Appendix B , §2 , §2 , §5 , Lemma 4 . Jastrzębski et al. (2017) S. Jastrzębski, Z. Kenton, D. Arpit, N. Ballas, A. Fischer, Y. Bengio, and A. Storkey Three factors influencing minima in sgd . arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.04623 . Cited by: §2 . Jelassi et al. (2022) S. Jelassi, D. Dobre, A. Mensch, Y. Li, and G. Gidel Dissecting adaptive methods in gans . arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.04319 . Cited by: §3.1 . Kaplan et al. (2020) J. Kaplan, S. McCandlish, T. Henighan, T. B. Brown, B. Chess, R. Child, S. Gray, A. Radford, J. Wu, and D. Amodei Scaling laws for neural language models . arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.08361 . Cited by: §1 . Li et al. (2021) Z. Li, S. Malladi, and S. Arora On the validity of modeling sgd with stochastic differential equations (sdes) . Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 34 , pp. 12712–12725 . Cited by: §2 . Malladi et al. (2022) S. Malladi, K. Lyu, A. Panigrahi, and S. Arora On the sdes and scaling rules for adaptive gradient algorithms . Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 35 , pp. 7697–7711 . Cited by: §2 , §3 . Marek et al. (2025) M. Marek, S. Lotfi, A. Somasundaram, A. G. Wilson, and M. Goldblum Small batch size training for language models: when vanilla sgd works, and why gradient accumulation is wasteful . arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.07101 . Cited by: §2 . McCandlish et al. (2018) S. McCandlish, J. Kaplan, D. Amodei, and O. D. Team An empirical model of large-batch training . arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.06162 . Cited by: §1 , §2 . Merrill et al. (2025) W. Merrill, S. Arora, D. Groeneveld, and H. Hajishirzi Critical batch size revisited: a simple empirical approach to large-batch language model training . arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.23971 . Cited by: §2 . Meterez et al. (2025) A. Meterez, D. Morwani, C. Oncescu, J. Wu, C. Pehlevan, and S. Kakade A simplified analysis of sgd for linear regression with weight averaging . arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.15535 . Cited by: §A.1 , §2 , §5 . OLMo et al. (2024) T. OLMo, P. Walsh, L. Soldaini, D. Groeneveld, K. Lo, S. Arora, A. Bhagia, Y. Gu, S. Huang, M. Jordan, et al. 2 olmo 2 furious . arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.00656 . Cited by: Appendix E , §1 , §2 . Petrov et al. (2025) I. Petrov, J. Dekoninck, L. Baltadzhiev, M. Drencheva, K. Minchev, M. Balunović, N. Jovanović, and M. Vechev Proof or bluff? evaluating llms on 2025 usa math olympiad . arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.21934 . Cited by: §1 . Raffel et al. (2020) C. Raffel, N. Shazeer, A. Roberts, K. Lee, S. Narang, M. Matena, Y. Zhou, W. Li, and P. J. Liu Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text transformer . Journal of machine learning research 21 ( 140 ), pp. 1–67 . Cited by: §4 . Shallue et al. (2019) C. J. Shallue, J. Lee, J. Antognini, J. Sohl-Dickstein, R. Frostig, and G. E. Dahl Measuring the effects of data parallelism on neural network training . Journal of Machine Learning Research 20 ( 112 ), pp. 1–49 . Cited by: §1 , §2 . Smith et al. (2017) S. L. Smith, P. Kindermans, C. Ying, and Q. V. Le Don’t decay the learning rate, increase the batch size . arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.00489 . Cited by: §2 . Srećković et al. (2025) T. Srećković, J. Geiping, and A. Orvieto Is your batch size the problem? revisiting the adam-sgd gap in language modeling . arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.12543 . Cited by: §2 . Team (2025) A. Team Apertus: Democratizing Open and Compliant LLMs for Global Language Environments . Note: https://huggingface.co/swiss-ai/Apertus-70B-2509 Cited by: §1 , §2 . Touvron et al. (2023) H. Touvron, T. Lavril, G. Izacard, X. Martinet, M. Lachaux, T. Lacroix, B. Rozière, N. Goyal, E. Hambro, F. Azhar, et al. Llama: open and efficient foundation language models . arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971 . Cited by: §1 , §2 . Wu et al. (2022a) J. Wu, D. Zou, V. Braverman, Q. Gu, and S. Kakade Last iterate risk bounds of sgd with decaying stepsize for overparameterized linear regression . In International Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 24280–24314 . Cited by: §2 , §5 . Wu et al. (2022b) J. Wu, D. Zou, V. Braverman, Q. Gu, and S. Kakade The power and limitation of pretraining-finetuning for linear regression under covariate shift . Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 35 , pp. 33041–33053 . Cited by: §2 , §5 , Lemma 4 . Wu et al. (2023a) J. Wu, D. Zou, Z. Chen, V. Braverman, Q. Gu, and P. L. Bartlett How many pretraining tasks are needed for in-context learning of linear regression? . arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.08391 . Cited by: §2 . Wu et al. (2023b) J. Wu, D. Zou, Z. Chen, V. Braverman, Q. Gu, and S. M. Kakade Finite-sample analysis of learning high-dimensional single relu neuron . In International Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 37919–37951 . Cited by: §2 . Xie et al. (2024) S. Xie, M. A. Mohamadi, and Z. Li Adam exploits -geometry of loss landscape via coordinate-wise adaptivity . arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.08198 . Cited by: §3.1 . Xie et al. (2020) Z. Xie, I. Sato, and M. Sugiyama A diffusion theory for deep learning dynamics: stochastic gradient descent exponentially favors flat minima . arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.03495 . Cited by: §2 . You et al. (2017) Y. You, I. Gitman, and B. Ginsburg Large batch training of convolutional networks . arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.03888 . Cited by: §1 . You et al. (2019) Y. You, J. Li, S. Reddi, J. Hseu, S. Kumar, S. Bhojanapalli, X. Song, J. Demmel, K. Keutzer, and C. Hsieh Large batch optimization for deep learning: training bert in 76 minutes . arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.00962 . Cited by: §2 . Zhang et al. (2019) G. Zhang, L. Li, Z. Nado, J. Martens, S. Sachdeva, G. Dahl, C. Shallue, and R. B. Grosse Which algorithmic choices matter at which batch sizes? insights from a noisy quadratic model . Advances in neural information processing systems 32 . Cited by: §2 . Zhang et al. (2024) H. Zhang, D. Morwani, N. Vyas, J. Wu, D. Zou, U. Ghai, D. Foster, and S. Kakade How does critical batch size scale in pre-training? . arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.21676 . Cited by: §1 , §2 , §2 , §4 . Zhao et al. (2024) R. Zhao, D. Morwani, D. Brandfonbrener, N. Vyas, and S. Kakade Deconstructing what makes a good optimizer for language models . arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.07972 . Cited by: §3.1 . Zou et al. (2021) D. Zou, J. Wu, V. Braverman, Q. Gu, and S. Kakade Benign overfitting of constant-stepsize sgd for linear regression . In Conference on Learning Theory , pp. 4633–4635 . Cited by: §2 , §5 . Appendix A Proofs for Section 5 A.1 Preliminaries We take as a convention for eigenvalues ordering . For two matrices and we use the notation to denote that is positive semi-definite (PSD). We denote for the inner product between and . Moreover, with a slight abuse of notation, we use the notation as elementwise comparison, namely if for all and if for all . To simplify the analysis, we will follow the approach of Meterez et al. (2025) and work in the eigenbasis of the data covariance . For the sake of completeness, we restate the main derivation for the bias and variance iterates in the case of constant learning rate and constant batch size, starting from the SGD update rule: (6) where in the last equation is the iterate covariance matrix rotated in the eigenbasis of . Since we can write the excess risk as: where , it suffices to push a diag operator through equation equation 6 . Finally, we get: where and are the bias and variance iterates respectively. Before we begin proving the main statements, we introduce several helpful lemmas that we will use. Lemma 2 . For and , we have the elementwise inequality: Proof. We have: Note that trivially we also have the other direction by noticing that . Multiplying by gives us the conclusion. ∎ Lemma 3 . For and such that and , we have: Proof. RHS bound. Since both sides are diagonal matrices, it suffices to prove the scalar inequality for every : Taking logarithms and defining where . For and , is monotonically increasing, so for , we have and hence (since ). Thus , which proves the RHS inequality. LHS bound. Similarly, we use the scalar inequality and the bounds Since is monotone, we apply it to both sides: It suffices to prove that: Using and , we obtain: Using , we get which holds automatically under and . This concludes the proof. ∎ A.2 Proofs of Main Statements Proof of Theorem 1 . Consider processes: process will have a learning rate step decay factor of and a batch size ramp up factor of and process will have and respectively. Define the transition matrices: Denote process as and process as where they depend on the base learning rate - note that we skip the indexing on when it is clear from context. In order to keep both the per stage data count, does steps per stage, and does steps per stage. We begin by establishing the upper bound first. Note that we assume that , and without loss of generality due to symmetry, that (and consequently ). Upper bound. Before we begin, we introduce the idea behind the proof. We define and . The derivation proceeds by unrolling the recurrence first over a single step, then over steps, and finally over stages. which follows from Assumption 1 . Applying Lemma 2 , we have: By Lemma 3 , we can replace the term with one involving : Following, we can unroll over : Finally, recursively unrolling across yields: For the lower bound, we follow a similar strategy, by bounding the term : Lemma 2 Note that the bias terms are equal , and the variance terms are . Dotting the terms into gives us the upper bound from Theorem 1 . Lower bound. We now turn our attention towards proving the lower bound in Theorem 1 . Note that the bias terms have an exponentially decaying dominating term. In order to obtain an inequality in the reverse direction for these terms, we compare with . We begin with lower bounding : Now we need to establish an upper bound for . We follow a similar analysis as we did for the upper bound subsection: Lemma 3 Comparing the bias and variance terms gives us the conclusion. ∎ Appendix B Normalized SGD analysis Under the setup introduced in Section 5 , we have the update rule for normalized SGD is: where for indexing the sample and batch size . For MSE and , the loss is: If we look at the risk at time we have: (7) (8) (9) (10) So the risk is equal to: Analyzing the gradients Taking the gradient for 1 sample: So we have: Moving forwards, we need to calculate the term in the denominator. Skipping the time index when convenient in order to simplify the notation, and writing , we compute by conditioning on and then applying the tower rule: First term Let . For , independence gives For , assume , so that the Gaussian fourth-moment identity yields Therefore, Summing over yields Second term Using and , we get So altogether, conditional on , Taking the outside expectation and letting , we obtain Since (Lemma 8) ( Jain et al., 2018 ) , then for large enough , we have that the gradient norms are dominated by the additive variance, which is captured in Assumption 2 . For the remainder of this paper we will assume is large enough for this assumption to hold, and with an abuse of notation we will write (as opposed to ): Under Assumption 2 , we have the following update rule: (11) Note that this is simply SGD with a learning rate . B.1 How Aggressive Can the Scheduler Be? In this section we provide a short lemma explaining what is the most aggressive scheduler we could possibly used, based on hard contraints on , . Lemma 4 (Divergence conditions.) . Suppose we are in the same setting as Corollary 1 . For a fixed initial learning rate , the training dynamics diverge asymptotically if as the training time goes to infinity, for and constants independent of time. Proof. To see this, we focus on the scaling of . Note that if , then at every cut we are effectively increasing the learning rate. Thus, there must exist such that , where is the maximum convergent learning rate for SGD ( Wu et al., 2022b ; Jain et al., 2018 ) , leading to divergence. ∎ Appendix C Weight Decay In this section we provide experiments on 150M models trained with AdamW, sweeping weight decay and learning rate , and the rest of the parameters are as explained in Section 1 . For every figure we pick the best pair on cosine annealing, and we use the values for Seesaw. For batch sizes 128 and 256, the optimal pair from the sweep was , while for batch size 512 it was . Figure 4 shows the results: Figure 4: 150M experiments with weight decay across different batch sizes (128, 256, 512) for cosine annealing and Seesaw. The learning rate and weight decay values are for batch sizes 128 and 256, and for batch size 512. Note that the losses overlap during training. We provide the final validation losses in Table 3 . Table 3 shows the final validation losses: B=128 B=256 B=512 150M (cosine) 3.0125 3.0221 3.0455 150M (Seesaw) 3.0028 3.0211 3.0463 Table 3: Final validation losses at the best learning rate and weight decay pair (for the cosine annealing scheduler) for each batch size, for . Note that the dynamics match robustly. Appendix D Comparison to other schedulers We compare our scheme with other schedulers in this section. Figure 5: 150M models trained with 4 different schedules, at CBS (right) and just below (left). Blue trace keeps learning rate fixed and doubles batch size, orange trace keeps learning rate fixed and quadruples batch size, green trace halves learning rate at fixed batch size, and red trace is Seesaw. Note that the naive scheduling (blue) severely underperforms the baseline (green) and Seesaw (red). Appendix E Auxiliary Losses In this section we ablate over the effect of z-loss on the training dynamics ( OLMo et al., 2024 ) . We observe no difference in the training stability of our models at M scale in Figure 6 : Figure 6: 150M models trained with cosine decay in Chinchilla scale, across 3 learning rates and 3 batch sizes. Note that the final validation losses are equal whether Z-Loss is enabled or not. However, while the final validation loss does not change as an effect of z-loss at our scale, we have observed certain instabilities in the z-loss towards the end of training when using Seesaw in Figure 7 . We speculate that the way we are scaling the learning rate and batch size might not be the proper way to do it for z-loss, and we leave this study for future work. Figure 7: 600M models trained with Seesaw decay in Chinchilla scale, with Z-Loss. Experimental support, please view the build logs for errors. Generated by L A T E xml . Instructions for reporting errors We are continuing to improve HTML versions of papers, and your feedback helps enhance accessibility and mobile support. To report errors in the HTML that will help us improve conversion and rendering, choose any of the methods listed below: Click the "Report Issue" ( ) button, located in the page header. Tip: You can select the relevant text first, to include it in your report. Our team has already identified the following issues . We appreciate your time reviewing and reporting rendering errors we may not have found yet. Your efforts will help us improve the HTML versions for all readers, because disability should not be a barrier to accessing research. Thank you for your continued support in championing open access for all. Have a free development cycle? Help support accessibility at arXiv! Our collaborators at LaTeXML maintain a list of packages that need conversion , and welcome developer contributions . We gratefully acknowledge support from our major funders , member institutions , , and all contributors. About · Help · Contact · Subscribe · Copyright · Privacy · Accessibility · Operational Status (opens in new tab) Major funding support from