Convergence of Muon with Newton–Schulz Report GitHub Issue × Title: Content selection saved. Describe the issue below: Description: Submit without GitHub Submit in GitHub arXiv is now an independent nonprofit! Learn more × Back to arXiv Why HTML? Report Issue Back to Abstract Download PDF Abstract 1 Introduction 2 Related work 3 Preliminaries 3.1 Notations 3.2 Problem Setting: Nonconvex Optimization 3.3 Muon Algorithm and Newton–Schulz Orthogonalization 3.4 Newton–Schulz polynomial 4 Main Results 4.1 Convergence of Muon (with Newton–Schulz ) Discussions of Theorem . 4.2 Decay Rate of and Convergence Rate of Discussion of Theorem . Practical implication. 4.3 Proof Sketch for Theorem . 4.4 Proof Sketch for Theorem 4.5 Comparisons with SGD with Momentum and Muon with Discussion of Theorems and . 5 Numerical Experiments 6 Conclusion References A Appendix A.1 Basic Facts for Matrix Norms A.2 Lemmas under Assumptions A.2.1 Assumption A.2.2 Assumption A.3 Newton–Schulz polynomial NS step preserves the unit spectral ball. B Muon with Finite Newton–Schulz Iteration C Muon with and SGD with momentum C.1 Theorem (Muon with SVD) C.2 Theorem (SGD with Momentum) D Newton–Schulz Lemmas: Proofs D.1 Detailed proofs for case when E Wall-Clock via Computational Complexity. Per-iteration Orthogonalization FLOPs. Discussion of Lemma . F Numerical Experiments Detail F.1 Experimental Setting F.2 Newton–Schulz steps ( ) ablations. G Additional Numerical Experiments Hyper-parameters G.1 MLP on MNIST G.2 CifarNet on CIFAR-10 G.3 ResNet-18 on CIFAR-100 G.4 WideResNet-28-10 on Tiny-ImageNet G.5 NanoGPT on FineWeb G.6 GPT-2 based model (1.3B) on FineWeb H Additional Ablation Experiments H.1 Newton–Schulz –polynomial degree- ablations. H.2 Rank–dependence. H.3 Batch size ablations. H.4 Degree-2 NS polynomial vs. Ad-hoc degree-2 NS polynomial License: CC BY-NC-ND 4.0 arXiv:2601.19156v1 [stat.ML] 27 Jan 2026 Convergence of Muon with Newton–Schulz Gyu Yeol Kim Affiliation: Seoul National University Affiliation: Seoul, South Korea Email: gyuyeolkim@snu.ac.kr Min-hwan Oh Affiliation: Seoul National University Affiliation: Seoul, South Korea Email: minoh@snu.ac.kr Abstract We analyze Muon as originally proposed and used in practice—using the momentum orthogonalization with a few Newton–Schulz steps. The prior theoretical results replace this key step in Muon with an exact SVD-based polar factor. We prove that Muon with Newton–Schulz converges to a stationary point at the same rate as the SVD-polar idealization, up to a constant factor for a given number of Newton–Schulz steps. We further analyze this constant factor and prove that it converges to 1 doubly exponentially in and improves with the degree of the polynomial used in Newton–Schulz for approximating the orthogonalization direction. We also prove that Muon removes the typical square-root-of-rank loss compared to its vector-based counterpart, SGD with momentum. Our results explain why Muon with a few low-degree Newton–Schulz steps matches exact-polar (SVD) behavior at a much faster wall-clock time and explain how much momentum matrix orthogonalization via Newton–Schulz benefits over the vector-based optimizer. Overall, our theory justifies the practical Newton–Schulz design of Muon , narrowing its practice–theory gap. 1 Introduction Modern deep neural networks comprise billions of parameters and demand highly efficient training procedures. A persistent challenge is that most widely used optimizers—such as stochastic gradient descent (SGD) ( Robbins and Monro, 1951 ) and adaptive methods such as Adam ( Kingma and Ba, 2015 ) —operate on vectorized parameters, thereby discarding the native matrix structure present in linear layers and attention projections. Optimizers that explicitly respect matrix structure can, in principle, yield search directions that are better aligned with the underlying geometry while remaining computationally efficient at scale. Muon ( Jordan et al., 2024 ) is an optimizer designed for matrix-structured parameters. At each iteration, instead of following the raw momentum, Muon orthogonalizes the mntum matrix and then uses this orthogonalized direction to update the weights. In practice, this orthogonalization is not computed via an exact singular value decomposition (SVD)—which is accurate but expensive—but is approximated efficiently by a small, fixed number of Newton–Schulz steps. Empirical studies ( Jordan et al., 2024 ; Liu et al., 2025a ) have reported strong performance at scale with this SVD-free implementation, making Muon an attractive alternative to vector-based optimizers. Despite recent attempts to analyze the convergence of Muon ( Shen et al., 2025 ; Li and Hong, 2025 ; Sato et al., 2025 ) , theory still lags behind practice. Existing analyses typically study an idealized variant that replaces the Newton–Schulz step—central to practical Muon —with an exact polar step computed by SVD for analytical convenience. This leaves open whether the actual SVD-free orthogonalization used in practice—i.e., a finite number of Newton–Schulz steps—admits principled nonconvex convergence guarantees, and how the Newton–Schulz approximation impacts rank dependence and efficiency. Therefore, the following research questions remain open: Research questions. • Does Muon with Newton–Schulz admit nonconvex convergence guarantees, and how do its rates compare to the exact SVD–polar idealization? • How does the Newton–Schulz steps and Newton–Schulz polynomial degree control the accuracy–compute trade - off? In particular, how large is the gap caused by using Newton–Schulz , and how does that gap become negligible? • Can we show that Muon converges faster than the vector-counterpart, SGD with momentum? What geometric mechanisms and rank dependence drive this gap? To address these questions, we analyze Muon as originally proposed ( Jordan et al., 2024 ) and as used in practice: Muon with momentum orthogonalization computed via Newton–Schulz . For nonconvex objectives, under standard smoothness assumptions, we prove the convergence of Muon to a stationary point, measured by the nuclear norm of the gradient. We establish that the convergence rate in the number of iterations matches the idealized (but not used in practice) SVD - based exact polar variant, up to a constant factor that depends on the polar approximation error (defined in Definition 3 ) for the fixed number of Newton–Schulz steps . Moreover, we show that the polar approximation error shrinks doubly exponentially as grows and decays with larger , which is the degree of the polynomial used in Newton–Schulz steps. Recursive updates using this polynomial allow the optimizer to find the approximated orthogonalization direction of the momentum matrix. Hence, with only a few Newton–Schulz steps, the convergence rate of Muon quickly tends to the convergence rate of the exact polar step via SVD. Consequently, our results imply that, because a few Newton–Schulz steps are far cheaper per iteration than SVD, the practical Muon implementation with Newton–Schulz attains substantially faster wall-clock convergence. Our main contributions are summarized as follows: • The first convergence result of Muon with Newton–Schulz . To our knowledge, we present the first nonconvex convergence guarantees for Muon with a finite number of Newton–Schulz steps (Theorem 1 ), as originally proposed and practically used. It is important to note that even for convex optimization, the convergence of Muon with Newton–Schulz has not been shown previously. The key distinction from the existing analyses of Muon is that we do not replace Newton–Schulz in the original Muon with the exact polar computed by SVD. • Analysis of polar approximation error and wall-clock convergence. We prove that the polar approximation error due to using Newton–Schulz instead of , in the Muon optimizer, decays doubly exponentially with the number of Newton–Schulz steps and decays with the degree of the polynomial required to approximate the orthogonalization direction of the momentum matrix (Definition 2 ). Thus, even with a few steps of Newton–Schulz , the convergence of Muon with Newton–Schulz becomes arbitrarily close to that of the SVD-variant in the number of iterations (Theorems 2 and 4 ). Hence, given that per-iteration computation is much more efficient for Newton–Schulz steps compared to SVD, the overall convergence in wall-clock time is much faster for Muon with Newton–Schulz . • Sharper rank dependence in Muon with Newton–Schulz . To prove the comparative advantage of Muon against the vector-based counterpart, we demonstrate for the first time that Muon with Newton–Schulz sharpens the convergence rate by a factor of the square root of the rank of the momentum matrix (see Table 1 and Theorem 3 ). 2 Related work Muon and momentum orthogonalization. Jordan et al. (2024) introduced Muon , which orthogonalizes a momentum matrix via a few Newton–Schulz steps (SVD-free), and reported strong empirical results at LLM scale ( Liu et al., 2025a ) . Earlier work orthogonalized gradients by SVD before applying momentum (Orthogonal- SGDM ; Tuddenham et al. (2022) ), whereas Muon applies momentum before orthogonalization and replaces SVD with Newton–Schulz , resulting in faster computation with only matrix multiplications. More details about Muon are described in 3.3 . Second-order preconditioners vs. Muon . Matrix-aware optimizers such as Shampoo ( Gupta et al., 2018 ) SOAP ( Vyas et al., 2024 ) and their variants ( An et al., 2025 ) are second-order preconditioners : they maintain layerwise curvature (Kronecker-factored second moments) and periodically apply inverse-root preconditioning. By contrast, Muon is not a second-order method ; it neither estimates nor inverts curvature but orthogonalizes the momentum matrix via a few Newton–Schulz iterations (SVD-free, using only matrix multiplications). These methods target different mechanisms—curvature preconditioning vs. projection/normalization—and can be complementary rather than directly comparable. Practical efficiency of Muon . Large-scale training reports for Muon ( Liu et al., 2025a ; Shah et al., 2025 ; Tveit et al., 2025 ) and communication/memory-aware variants ( Ahn and Dion, 2025 ; Liu et al., 2025b ) motivate a theory that is SVD-free and GPU-aligned. Our analysis of Newton–Schulz , a key step in the Muon optimizer, adopts precisely that stance. The analysis provided in this work can be adapted to other variants of Muon . Convergence analysis of Muon . Several recent analyses examine Muon but typically either idealize the orthogonalization by assuming an exact SVD polar step ( Shen et al., 2025 ) , work under Frobenius-smoothness with dimension-driven constants ( Li and Hong, 2025 ) , focus on stability/variant phenomena ( Sato et al., 2025 ) , or offer complementary lenses (steepest descent under norms, trust-region views, implicit constraints, or LMO/Frank-Wolfe formulations) without addressing Newton–Schulz step accuracy in nonconvex rates ( Bernstein and Newhouse, 2024 ; Kovalev, 2025 ; Chen et al., 2025 ; Riabinin et al., 2025 ) . Key distinctions compared to the existing analyses of Muon . Prior work either assumes exact SVD polar steps, measures progress in a geometry that obscures rank benefits, or does not quantify the approximation from Newton–Schulz in Muon . Our work is the first to analyze how two key parameters—the number of Newton–Schulz steps and the degree of the polynomial used for finding the orthogonalization direction of the momentum matrix approximately—affect the convergence rate of Muon . The results indicate a nonconvex convergence rate to a stationary point, an explicit and rapidly vanishing constant factor derived from Newton–Schulz instead of SVD, and sharper rank dependence than SGD with momentum under the same metric. Overall, our work explains why Muon converges quickly (particularly in wall-clock time) as well as why only a few steps of Newton–Schulz suffice in practice. 3 Preliminaries 3.1 Notations For matrix , is its transpose. For , . We write , , and for the nuclear, spectral (operator), and Frobenius norms, respectively, and . For a thin SVD , the polar factor is , a partial isometry with and (See Appendix A.1 ). For two sequences and , implies that there exists a constant such that holds for all . We use for expectations over all algorithmic randomness. 3.2 Problem Setting: Nonconvex Optimization We consider the stochastic optimization of a matrix-valued parameter: where the objective is nonconvex with . We denote by the maximal possible rank of the matrix. At iteration , a mini-batch is drawn with i.i.d., and are independent across . At , the model parameter is initialized, and we define the initial sub-optimality as . In this paper, the following assumptions are made for the convergence analysis: Assumption 1 (Lipschitz smoothness) . The objective function is continuously differentiable and -Lipschitz smooth, i.e., for all , We use smoothness with respect to the operator norm (and the nuclear norm as its dual). Assumption 2 (Bounded variance) . We assume is an unbiased stochastic estimator of the true gradient and has bounded variance for all and a single sample , i.e. For a mini-batch of size , the variance is at most . Assumptions 1 and 2 are standard for analyzing first-order methods in stochastic optimization ( Boyd and Vandenberghe, 2004 ; Nemirovski et al., 2009 ; Candes and Recht, 2012 ; Shapiro et al., 2021 ; Reddi et al., 2018 ; Zou et al., 2019 ) . - smoothness is typically defined using a norm and its dual, and the specific operator-nuclear geometry chosen here is a natural fit when working with matrix parameters and polar or orthogonal updates ( Nesterov, 2013 ; Beck, 2017 ; Jaggi, 2013 ) . The bounded-variance assumption, where the mini-batch variance is , is a foundational concept for algorithms like SGD in both convex and nonconvex scenarios ( Bottou et al., 2018 ; Ghadimi and Lan, 2013 ) . In this paper, the metric for the convergence rate is defined as follows: Definition 1 ( -stationary point) . We call an -stationary point (in the nuclear norm) if . Equivalently, we say an algorithm attains -stationarity in steps if Note that when working with functions that have matrix inputs, using the nuclear norm to find a stationary point provides a more restrictive and precise condition than using the standard Frobenius norm. In other words, if a point satisfies the stationarity condition for the nuclear norm, it is guaranteed to also satisfy the condition for the Frobenius norm. 3.3 Muon Algorithm and Newton–Schulz Orthogonalization Algorithm 1 Muon (with the illustration of Newton–Schulz orthogonalization) 0: learning rate , momentum , Newton–Schulz steps , Newton–Schulz polynomial (degree , batch size , total iteration . 1: Initialize: , 2: for to do 3: Compute (batch) gradients 4: 5: with Pre- Newton–Schulz scaling 6: for to do 7: Newton–Schulz steps (Lines 6-9) 8: end for 9: 10: Update parameters 11: end for For clarity of exposition, we present pseudocode for Muon with an explicit illustration of the Newton–Schulz steps (Lines 5–9) in Algorithm 1 . Note that this is not a new algorithm; it is the original method of Jordan et al. (2024) , here written in a more general mini-batch form with a step-by-step illustration of Newton–Schulz . Rather than orthogonalizing via SVD, Muon approximates the orthogonalization direction using only matrix multiplications; the key mechanism enabling this is the Newton–Schulz -based orthogonalization. The key advantages of using Newton–Schulz for orthogonalization are as follows: • Newton–Schulz makes Muon inversion-free and SVD-free. SVD is computationally expensive and makes each iteration costly. In contrast, the Newton–Schulz approach relies solely on matrix multiplications, yielding substantially better per-iteration efficiency—especially for large parameter matrices. • Newton–Schulz is an iterative method that allows for precise control over the degree of orthogonality by adjusting the number of iterations. The number of Newton–Schulz steps provides a direct trade-off between computational cost and the degree of orthogonality, offering valuable flexibility. 3.4 Newton–Schulz polynomial In the Muon algorithm, at every iteration, a scaled momentum matrix is orthogonalized via Newton–Schulz steps. First, the matrix is formed and is then passed to a polynomial function with degree . Recursive updates by this polynomial make the matrix nearly orthogonal, i.e., . We first define this function in Definition 2 and state the properties of this polynomial used in Newton–Schulz . Definition 2 ( Newton–Schulz polynomial) . For degree , the Newton–Schulz polynomial is the Taylor truncation of at , i.e., for . The explicit form of the Newton–Schulz polynomial for degree is Equivalently, with reparametrization , . Proposition 1 (Properties of ) . For : • Positivity. and with equality iff . • Monotonicity of . Let , then we have non - decreasing on and . Consequently, for any symmetric with spectrum in , the Newton–Schulz update satisfies : Newton–Schulz steps preserve the unit spectral ball (see Appendix A.3 ). Moreover, the property of the function is used when proving how fast does one step of Newton–Schulz make the momentum orthogonal (Lemma 2 ). In order to quantify the degree of orthogonality of the output matrix after steps of Newton–Schulz , and to measure the approximation error derived from Newton–Schulz compared to the exact-polar method via SVD under operator-norm, we define the following: Definition 3 (Orthogonality residual and polar approximation error) . For fixed , let be the orthogonal projector onto . With from Algorithm 1 , define the orthogonality residual and the polar approximation error by Define and . Remark 1 . In Muon , there is a scaling step for the momentum matrix before applying it to the recursive update by the Newton–Schulz polynomial (Line 5 in Algorithm 1 ). This scaling ensures , which is required to apply the Newton–Schulz polynomial properties described in Proposition 1 . In parallel, the initial residual is strictly less than 1, i.e., for every iteration (see Appendix D ). 4 Main Results We begin by stating our two main theorems: (i) a nonconvex convergence rate for Muon with a finite number of Newton–Schulz steps (Theorem 1 ); and (ii) an explicit bound on the multiplicative constant induced by Newton–Schulz , together with its (doubly) exponential decay in (Theorem 2 ). We then provide brief proof sketches for both theorems in Sections 4.3 and 4.4 . For comparisons, Section 4.5 also presents convergence rates for the idealized Muon with an exact SVD-based polar step and for SGD with momentum—the vector-based baseline—stated under the same nuclear-norm stationarity metric. 4.1 Convergence of Muon (with Newton–Schulz ) Theorem 1 (Convergence of Muon with Newton–Schulz ) . Suppose Assumptions 1 and 2 hold, and run Muon (Algorithm 1 ) with initialization . Choose the stepsize and momentum as and where . Then there exists a factor , depending only on the number of Newton–Schulz steps, such that Consequently, Muon with Newton–Schulz attains - stationarity with an iteration complexity of iterations. Discussions of Theorem 1 . Theorem 1 guarantees that Muon with Newton–Schulz converges to an -stationary point. To the best of our knowledge, this convergence guarantee is the first result for Muon with Newton–Schulz . Moreover, as shown later by comparison with the SVD-based polar variant, the iteration complexity of Muon with Newton–Schulz matches the exact-polar rate up to a multiplicative factor that depends on the polar-approximation error (e.g., Table 1 ). Crucially, we show later in Theorem 2 that converges at an exponential rate in the number of Newton–Schulz steps , so the convergence gap (in the number of iterations) to the ideal SVD-polar rate can be made arbitrarily small. Since each Newton–Schulz step is substantially cheaper than an SVD, these results provide the first theoretical explanation for the superior practical performance observed for the original (SVD-free) Muon . 4.2 Decay Rate of and Convergence Rate of We now quantify how fast approaches . For a given number of Newton–Schulz steps, we can show that the polar-approximation error decays doubly exponentially in (with faster decay for larger ). Since is controlled by , it follows that is at the same rate. The following theorem formalizes this result. Theorem 2 (Upper-bounds on and ) . For the Newton–Schulz polynomial with degree and for any , . Hence, the bound of the polar approximation error and the factor occurred by Newton–Schulz is where . Discussion of Theorem 2 . The theorem shows that is bounded by . Hence, vanishes doubly exponentially in (and improves with larger ). Therefore, at the same doubly exponential rate. Together with Theorem 1 , this result implies that the iteration-complexity gap between Newton–Schulz and the idealized SVD-polar update becomes negligible after only a few Newton–Schulz steps. Practical implication. A finite number of Newton–Schulz steps yields iteration complexity essentially indistinguishable from exact SVD updates (up to the factor doubly exponentially fast), while dramatically reducing per-iteration cost by using only matrix multiplications. 4.3 Proof Sketch for Theorem 1 . We briefly outline the main ideas. First, introduce the scaled momentum (faithfully following the original update rule), so the EMA becomes . Next, apply the descent lemma (Lemma 6 ) to the update , which yields a term of the form . Decompose this inner product as thereby isolating the momentum mismatch. Prior analyses typically stop here and average over iterations. In contrast, we further split as separating the exact polar factor from the Newton–Schulz orthogonalizer (the output matrix of the Newton–Schulz routine). As we define the polar approximation error as the discrepancy between the exact polar factor and the actual step produced by steps of Newton–Schulz , we can control this part with respect to . This yields a one-step descent inequality for Muon that explicitly includes the Newton–Schulz -induced error . Averaging this inequality over and choosing and as specified in Theorem 1 produces the stated convergence rate. Full details appear in Appendix B . Table 1: Comparison of convergence rates. Method Convergence rate SGD with momentum (Theorem 3 ) Muon with SVD (Theorem 4 ) Muon (Theorem 1 ) , , iterations , batch size , Lipschitz constant , variance bound The factor converges to at exponential rate in step . (Theorem 2 ): , where is the number of Newton–Schulz step and is the degree of the Newton–Schulz polynomial (Def. 2 ). 4.4 Proof Sketch for Theorem 2 We outline how Theorem 2 follows; full proofs appear in Appendix D . Recall that in Theorem 1 , the convergence rate contains the polar-approximation error and the multiplicative factor depending on . To bound the resulting multiplicative factor , we relate to an orthogonality residual that quantifies how close the Newton–Schulz iterate is to having orthonormal columns. Concretely, letting be the output matrix after Newton–Schulz steps applied to the (scaled) momentum at iteration , define . The next lemma provides the spectral link between the residual and the polar-approximation error: Lemma 1 (Orthogonality residual vs. Polar approximation error) . Let be the smallest positive eigenvalue of restricted to (set if ). Then Next, we describe how a single Newton–Schulz step transforms the residual through the degree- polynomial : Lemma 2 (Residual update) . For Newton–Schulz polynomial , the orthogonality residual is updated by Newton–Schulz per step as where . To prove Lemma 2 , we introduce , note that is non-decreasing on and satisfies (Proposition 1 ), and then translate this monotonicity to the residual map . Finally, we obtain a contraction bound and its multi-step consequence: Lemma 3 (Residual decay by Newton–Schulz polynomial) . For Newton–Schulz polynomial , on where is a function defined in Lemma 2 . Hence, for every and all , 4.5 Comparisons with SGD with Momentum and Muon with To enable a fair comparison with the original Muon with Newton–Schulz method, we also establish convergence guarantees for two baselines: (i) SGD with momentum and (ii) the idealized Muon with an exact polar step computed by SVD . All results are derived under the same smoothness and bounded-variance assumptions, and progress is measured by the nuclear norm of the gradient, so the rates are directly comparable. The convergence bound in Theorem 3 for SGD with momentum (Theorem 3 ) is, to our knowledge, new and may be of independent interest. It provides a clean reference point for vector-based updates under the same stationarity metric. Theorem 3 (Convergence of SGD with momentum) . Suppose Assumptions 1 and 2 hold, and run SGD with momentum. Choosing and , the following holds Consequently, SGD with momentum attains - stationarity with an iteration complexity of . Note that the rate for Muon with SVD (Theorem 4 ) is obtained as a special case of Muon with Newton–Schulz analysis by setting the polar-approximation error to zero (i.e., replacing Newton–Schulz with an exact polar step). This “oracle” baseline clarifies the gap that Newton–Schulz needs to close in practice and is useful for interpreting the effect of a finite number of Newton–Schulz steps. Theorem 4 ( Muon with SVD) . Under Assumptions 1 and 2 , setting in Theorem 1 yields Consequently, the idealized Muon with attains - stationarity with iteration complexity of Discussion of Theorems 3 and 4 . Relative to SGD with momentum, the SVD-based polar variant of Muon removes the factor from the deterministic (first) term and sharpens rank dependence in the stochastic terms under the same nuclear-norm stationarity metric. Geometrically, the polar step aligns the update with the leading singular structure of the gradient (via spectral–nuclear duality), converting a Frobenius-aligned descent direction into one that is optimally aligned for the nuclear norm, thereby sharpening the dependence. Turning to the practical Muon with Newton–Schulz , Theorem 1 shows that its iteration complexity matches that of the SVD-based polar variant (Theorem 4 ) up to a multiplicative factor . By Theorem 2 , doubly exponentially fast in the number of Newton–Schulz steps (and improves with the polynomial degree ). Consequently, a small already yields rates that are essentially indistinguishable from the ideal SVD-based baseline in iteration count. Since each Newton–Schulz step uses only matrix multiplications (and avoids SVD), the per-iteration cost is much lower, which explains the superior wall-clock performance of the original SVD-free Muon observed in practice. 5 Numerical Experiments Setup. We conduct a numerical experiment with the CIFAR - 10 (50k/10k) dataset and a CNN model, specifically CifarNet , which has approximately M parameters. We compare optimizers: SGD with momentum (baseline), idealized Muon with SVD, and Muon with Newton–Schulz ( ). For the Newton–Schulz step sweep, we use the Newton–Schulz polynomial with degree . We run 50 epochs, and the batch size is . Results are plotted in Fig. 1 . Performance is assessed by plotting the training loss (left column) and test loss (right column) over epochs (top row) as well as the cumulative wall-clock time (bottom row). Results represent the average of five runs with different random seeds, including standard deviations. More detailed numerical settings are described in Appendix F.1 . Ablation on Newton–Schulz step . As increases, the learning dynamics per epoch steadily improve: Muon with already outperforms SGD - M, and nearly coincides with the SVD - based Muon in both train loss and test loss, in line with Theorems 1 and 2 , which state that the Newton–Schulz variant matches the SVD iteration complexity up to a factor that decays doubly exponentially in . At the same time, the bottom row of Fig. 1 shows that Muon with or reaches a given test loss substantially faster in wall - clock time than the SVD variant, reflecting the lower per - iteration cost of the Newton–Schulz update. Figure 1: Newton–Schulz steps ( ) ablation. Muon with Newton–Schulz for vs. Muon (SVD) and SGD with momentum (SGD - M, baseline). We additionally performed numerical experiments on various datasets using models at different scales (with the number of parameters indicated in parentheses): a multilayer perceptron (MLP) with 0.5M parameters on MNIST; ResNet-18 (11.2M) on CIFAR-100; WideResNet-28-10 (36.6M) on Tiny-ImageNet; NanoGPT (124M, Transformer) on FineWeb; and a GPT-2–based model (1.3B, Transformer) on FineWeb. All additional experimental results are presented in Appendix G . Ablation on Newton–Schulz polynomial degree . We perform a controlled ablation that varies the degree of the Newton–Schulz polynomial while fixing the number of Newton–Schulz steps to for all variants. Increasing the degree improves optimization (the loss drops faster at a fixed epoch) but lengthens each step, yielding a clear accuracy–time trade-off (See Appendix H.1 ). This mirrors the theory that the residual contracts as (Lemma 3 ), while computation scales with polynomial evaluations. Rank dependence. We vary the monitored layer’s effective rank and plot the epoch-averaged on a log–log scale. SGD -M shows a positive slope of approximately (grows with ), whereas Muon and its variants are nearly flat. These observations are precisely in line with Theorem 3 and Theorem 4 , which state that orthogonalizing momentum removes the deterministic penalty and softens the rank dependence of the stochastic terms. The more detailed experimental settings and results are deferred to Appendix H.2 . 6 Conclusion We analyzed practical Muon with finite Newton–Schulz steps and proved nonconvex convergence to -stationarity with iteration complexity matching the SVD-polar idealization, up to a factor that shrinks doubly exponentially in (and improves with ). Thus, a few Newton–Schulz steps recover the idealized rate while remaining SVD-free and GPU-friendly. We also provided baselines for SGD with momentum and the SVD-polar variant, showing that Muon weakens rank dependence under the same metric —closing the theory–practice gap and explaining its practical performance. Use of Large Language Models Large Language Models (LLMs) are used solely as assistive tools for writing. Specifically, we employed an LLM to improve the clarity, grammar, and style of exposition. No part of the research ideation, algorithm design, theoretical analysis, or experimental results involved the use of LLMs. The authors take full responsibility for the content of the paper. References Ahn and Dion (2025) K. Ahn and B. X. Dion A communication-efficient optimizer for large models . arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.05295 . Cited by: §2 . An et al. (2025) K. An, Y. Liu, R. Pan, Y. Ren, S. Ma, D. Goldfarb, and T. Zhang Asgo: adaptive structured gradient optimization . arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.20762 . Cited by: §2 . Beck (2017) A. Beck First-order methods in optimization . SIAM . Cited by: §3.2 . Bernstein and Newhouse (2024) J. Bernstein and L. Newhouse Old optimizer, new norm: an anthology . arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.20325 . Cited by: §2 . Bottou et al. (2018) L. Bottou, F. E. Curtis, and J. Nocedal Optimization methods for large-scale machine learning . SIAM review 60 ( 2 ), pp. 223–311 . Cited by: §3.2 . Boyd and Vandenberghe (2004) S. P. Boyd and L. Vandenberghe Convex optimization . Cambridge university press . Cited by: §3.2 . Candes and Recht (2012) E. Candes and B. Recht Exact matrix completion via convex optimization . Communications of the ACM 55 ( 6 ), pp. 111–119 . Cited by: §3.2 . Chen et al. (2025) L. Chen, J. Li, and Q. Liu Muon optimizes under spectral norm constraints . arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.15054 . Cited by: §2 . Ghadimi and Lan (2013) S. Ghadimi and G. Lan Stochastic first-and zeroth-order methods for nonconvex stochastic programming . SIAM journal on optimization 23 ( 4 ), pp. 2341–2368 . Cited by: §3.2 . Golub and Reinsch (1971) G. H. Golub and C. Reinsch Singular value decomposition and least squares solutions . In Linear algebra , pp. 134–151 . Cited by: 1st item . Gupta et al. (2018) V. Gupta, T. Koren, and Y. Singer Shampoo: preconditioned stochastic tensor optimization . In International Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 1842–1850 . Cited by: §2 . Jaggi (2013) M. Jaggi Revisiting frank-wolfe: projection-free sparse convex optimization . In International conference on machine learning , pp. 427–435 . Cited by: §3.2 . Jordan et al. (2024) K. Jordan, Y. Jin, V. Boza, J. You, F. Cesista, L. Newhouse, and J. Bernstein Muon: an optimizer for hidden layers in neural networks . External Links: Link Cited by: §1 , §1 , §2 , §3.3 . Kingma and Ba (2015) D. P. Kingma and J. Ba Adam: A method for stochastic optimization . In 3rd International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2015, San Diego, CA, USA, May 7-9, 2015, Conference Track Proceedings , Cited by: §1 . Kovalev (2025) D. Kovalev Understanding gradient orthogonalization for deep learning via non-euclidean trust-region optimization . arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.12645 . Cited by: §2 . Li and Hong (2025) J. Li and M. Hong A note on the convergence of muon and further . arXiv e-prints , pp. arXiv–2502 . Cited by: §1 , §2 . Liu et al. (2025a) J. Liu, J. Su, X. Yao, Z. Jiang, G. Lai, Y. Du, Y. Qin, W. Xu, E. Lu, J. Yan, et al. Muon is scalable for llm training . arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.16982 . Cited by: §1 , §2 , §2 . Liu et al. (2025b) L. Liu, Z. Xu, Z. Zhang, H. Kang, Z. Li, C. Liang, W. Chen, and T. Zhao Cosmos: a hybrid adaptive optimizer for memory-efficient training of llms . arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.17410 . Cited by: §2 . Nemirovski et al. (2009) A. Nemirovski, A. Juditsky, G. Lan, and A. Shapiro Robust stochastic approximation approach to stochastic programming . SIAM Journal on optimization 19 ( 4 ), pp. 1574–1609 . Cited by: §3.2 . Nesterov (2013) Y. Nesterov Introductory lectures on convex optimization: a basic course . Vol. 87 , Springer Science & Business Media . Cited by: §3.2 . Reddi et al. (2018) S. J. Reddi, S. Kale, and S. Kumar On the convergence of adam and beyond . In International Conference on Learning Representations , Cited by: §3.2 . Riabinin et al. (2025) A. Riabinin, E. Shulgin, K. Gruntkowska, and P. Richtárik Gluon: making muon & scion great again!(bridging theory and practice of lmo-based optimizers for llms) . arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.13416 . Cited by: §2 . Robbins and Monro (1951) H. Robbins and S. Monro A stochastic approximation method . The annals of mathematical statistics , pp. 400–407 . Cited by: §1 . Sato et al. (2025) N. Sato, H. Naganuma, and H. Iiduka Analysis of muon’s convergence and critical batch size . arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.01598 . Cited by: §1 , §2 . Shah et al. (2025) I. Shah, A. M. Polloreno, K. Stratos, P. Monk, A. Chaluvaraju, A. Hojel, A. Ma, A. Thomas, A. Tanwer, D. J. Shah, et al. Practical efficiency of muon for pretraining . arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.02222 . Cited by: §2 . Shapiro et al. (2021) A. Shapiro, D. Dentcheva, and A. Ruszczynski Lectures on stochastic programming: modeling and theory . SIAM . Cited by: §3.2 . Shen et al. (2025) W. Shen, R. Huang, M. Huang, C. Shen, and J. Zhang On the convergence analysis of muon . arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.23737 . Cited by: §1 , §2 . Tuddenham et al. (2022) M. Tuddenham, A. Prügel-Bennett, and J. Hare Orthogonalising gradients to speed up neural network optimisation . arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.07052 . Cited by: §2 . Tveit et al. (2025) A. Tveit, B. Remseth, and A. Skogvold Muon optimizer accelerates grokking . arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.16041 . Cited by: §2 . Vyas et al. (2024) N. Vyas, D. Morwani, R. Zhao, M. Kwun, I. Shapira, D. Brandfonbrener, L. Janson, and S. Kakade Soap: improving and stabilizing shampoo using adam . arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.11321 . Cited by: §2 . Zou et al. (2019) F. Zou, L. Shen, Z. Jie, W. Zhang, and W. Liu A sufficient condition for convergences of adam and rmsprop . In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pp. 11127–11135 . Cited by: §3.2 . Appendix A Appendix A.1 Basic Facts for Matrix Norms Definition 4 (Schatten Norms) . For each , the Schatten- norm is defined as , where are the singular values of . • Nuclear/trace norm: (Sum of singular values) • spectral/operator norm: (largest singular value) • Frobenius norm: For any conjugate pairs , i.e., , the norms and are dual to each other. In particular, the nuclear norm and the spectral norm are duals. Lemma 4 (Hölder’s inequality) . For any , Proof. Let . Let’s define a new matrix . Since and are orthogonal matrices, their operator norm is . Since is diagonal, where is the -th singular value of . Combining inequalities, we have . ∎ Lemma 5 . For any and any constant , Proof. By Young’s inequality (i.e., with ), for any positive constant , If we choose where , we get ∎ Proposition 2 . Let with . Denote that its singular values are . Then the following holds: (i) Proof. Let . Then Since , we have Hence, ∎ (ii) If , then . Proof. Let . Then . ∎ (iii) . Proof. By Cauchy-Schwarz inequality, ∎ (iv) . Proof. Since singular values are always non-negative , Taking the square root, we get . ∎ (v) The polar factor is scale-invariant: for all . Proof. Let . Then . Also, , so . Thus, for all . ∎ A.2 Lemmas under Assumptions A.2.1 Assumption 1 Definition 5 ( -smoothness) . A differentiable function is -smooth if its gradient is -Lipschitz continuous, i.e., for all , We use smoothness with respect to the operator norm (and the nuclear norm as its dual). Lemma 6 (Descent Lemma) . Let be -smooth. Then, for all , Proof. Define an auxiliary scalar function by considering the value of along the line segment from to : By the fundamental theorem of calculus, Using the chain rule, . Substituting this back into the integral equation gives: Add and subtract , we have: We now use the generalized Cauchy-Schwarz inequality or Hölder’s inequality (Lemma 4 ), which states that for any matrices and , the nuclear norm is the dual norm to the operator norm . Applying this to the integrand: By the -smoothness of : Combining these inequalities, we obtain a bound on the integrand, yielding the final form: ∎ Lemma 7 (Gradient-gap inequality) . Under Assumption 1 , for any , we have Proof. In the descent lemma (Lemma 6 ), let . Then, we have where the last inequality is due to Proposition 2 (iv). Since , we have ∎ A.2.2 Assumption 2 Lemma 8 (Unbiasedness and bounded variance) . If Assumption 2 holds, then where is the batch size. Proof. Since with , where the last equality is due to i.i.d. uniform sampling with and independence. The last inequality is due to . According to Jensen’s inequality, we have ∎ A.3 Newton–Schulz polynomial Newton–Schulz steps orthogonalize a matrix via Newton–Schulz steps applied to . Define Newton–Schulz polynomial the degree is . The following are the properties of along with their proofs. Newton–Schulz polynomial . For degree , the Newton–Schulz polynomial is the Taylor truncation of at , i.e., for . The explicit form of the Newton–Schulz polynomial for degree is Equivalently, with reparametrization and . Proposition 1 (Properties of ). For : • Positivity. and with equality if and only if . • Monotonicity of . Let ; then we have non - decreasing on and . Consequently, for any symmetric with spectrum in , the Newton–Schulz update satisfies : Newton–Schulz steps preserve the unit spectral ball (see Appendix A.3 ). proof. Positivity. and with equality if and only if . Proof. Separating the first term (for ) from the summation that defines : The coefficient is . The rest of the polynomial is the sum . For any term in this sum and for any , the coefficients are strictly positive for all . Also, for any exponent , is non-negative in the range . Each term is a product of a positive number and a non-negative number, which means each term is non-negative. Hence, This proves that for all . It is also trivially true that . ∎ Monotonicity of . Proof. First note . For monotonicity, differentiate: Set and define . Then Hence Now, we compute in closed form. Since we obtain Expanding and collecting coefficients of gives Using the ratio identity for , and also . Therefore, all coefficients up to degree vanish, and we are left with with strict positivity for when . Since on , we conclude i.e., is non-decreasing on , and for when . Together with , this proves the proposition. ∎ NS step preserves the unit spectral ball. Let be symmetric with spectrum . By spectral calculus, where . Thus because is non-decreasing on . Hence, the Newton–Schulz update maps the unit spectral ball into itself. Appendix B Muon with Finite Newton–Schulz Iteration Algorithm 1 Muon with Newton–Schulz Orthogonalization 0: learning rate , momentum , Newton–Schulz steps , Newton–Schulz polynomial with degree , batch size , total iteration . 1: Initialize: , 2: for to do 3: 4: 5: with (scaling ensures ) 6: for to do 7: 8: end for 9: 10: 11: end for Proof of Theorem 1 . First, we introduce the scaled EMA momentum: . Then, we get . Note that the polar factor is scale-invariant (Proposition 2 (v)). Let be the polar factor of , i.e., . Hence, . By Assumption 1 , we start from descent lemma (Lemma 6 ). Since , we have where the second inequality and the third inequality are due to Hölder’s inequality (Lemma 4 ), and the last equality is due to (Proposition 2 (ii)). Now, we define the polar approximation error , which is the error between the exact polar factor and the actual step generated by -step Newton–Schulz steps, i.e., , measured in the operator norm. Since , , we have where the last inequality is due to and the last equality holds because . Since , we arrive at the clean one-step inequality as (1) Rearranging and taking the expectation yields (2) Bounding . In order to bound , we introduce the true scaled momentum defined by the true (full-batch) gradient instead of for each step : • for and . • Note that for and . Then we can decompose as (3) Bounding the Term (A). Let . From the recursion, Hence, we have Applying Assumption 1 and using the fact that , we have Hence, we have the following recursion, Since , we have By unrolling the recursion and taking the expectation, we get (4) Bounding the Term (B). When we unroll the EMA recursion of both and , Then, we compute the expectation of the Frobenius norm bias caused by and , (5) Applying Jensen’s inequality and the linearity of expectation gives By Lemma 8 , Eq.( 5 ) becomes Using the fact that for with (Proposition 2 (iii)), we have (6) Plugging Eq.( 4 ) and Eq.( 6 ) into Eq.( 3 ), we obtain (7) Averaging and tuning. Plugging Eq.( 7 ) into Eq.( 2 ), we get Averaging over , we obtain Using Proposition 2 (iii) and Lemma 7 , , where . Then, we have where . By setting , we obtain Setting , we get (8) From Newton–Schulz residual to factor . By the Newton–Schulz residual–error link (Lemma 1 ) and the residual contraction (Lemma 3 ) as assembled in Corollary 1 , we have Hence, we bound the factor as with (Remark 1 ). Finally, we conclude from Eq.( 8 ) that with the constant factor bounded by Finally, we can find an -nuclear norm stationary point of with a complexity of ∎ Appendix C Muon with and SGD with momentum C.1 Theorem 4 (Muon with SVD) Algorithm 2 Muon with 0: learning rate , momentum , Newton–Schulz steps , batch size , Total iteration . 1: Initialize: , 2: for to do 3: 4: 5: ( , then ) 6: 7: end for 8: return Proof of Theorem 4 . First, we introduce the scaled EMA momentum: . Then, we get . Note that the polar factor is scale-invariant (Proposition 2 (v)). Let be the polar factor of , i.e., . Hence, . By Assumption 1 , we start from descent lemma (Lemma 6 ). Since , we have where the last equality is due to . Let . Then . Since is a partial isometry, (and if ). Then, we have where the last equality is due to (Proposition 2 (ii)). By Hölder’s inequality (Lemma 4 ) and the triangle inequality, we have Rearranging and taking expectation gives (9) Bounding . In order to bound , we introduce the true scaled momentum defined by the true (full-batch) gradient instead of for each step : • for and . • Note that for and . Then we can decompose as (10) Bounding the Term (A). Let . From the recursion, Hence, we have Applying Assumption 1 and using the fact that , we have Hence, we have the following recursion, Since , we have By unrolling the recursion and taking the expectation, we get (11) Bounding the Term (B). When we unroll the EMA recursion of both and , Then, we compute the expectation of the Frobenius norm bias caused by and , (12) Applying Jensen’s inequality and the linearity of expectation gives By Lemma 8 , Eq.( 12 ) becomes Using the fact that for with (Proposition 2 (iii)), we have (13) Plugging Eq.( 11 ) and Eq.( 13 ) into Eq.( 10 ), we obtain (14) Averaging and tuning. Plugging Eq.( 14 ) into Eq.( 9 ), we get Averaging over , we obtain Using Proposition 2 (iii) and Lemma 7 , , where . Then, we have where . By setting , we obtain Setting , we get (15) Thus, we can find an -nuclear norm stationary point of with a complexity of ∎ C.2 Theorem 3 (SGD with Momentum) Algorithm 3 SGD with momentum ( SGD -M) 0: learning rate , momentum , batch size 1: Initialize: , 2: for to do 3: 4: 5: 6: end for 7: return Proof of Theorem 3 . First, we introduce the scaled EMA momentum: . Then, we get with and the scaled learning rate , yielding . By Assumption 1 , we start from the descent lemma (Lemma 6 ). Since , we have By using , we obtain where the second inequality is due to (Proposition 2 (iv)). The last inequality holds by choosing so that we can drop the last term. Rearranging and taking expectation gives Averaging over to , we obtain (16) where . Denote (17) Bounding . We introduce the true scaled momentum defined by the true (full-batch) gradient instead of for each step : • for and . • Note that for and . Then, we can decompose using , (18) Bounding the Term (A). Let . Using the recursion for , we have Apply the variation of Young’s inequality (Lemma 5 ) with : Since and , and , we get By Assumption 1 and the norm monotonicity (Proposition 2 (iv)), we have and Hence, we have the following recursion, Taking expectation and averaging over to , we obtain Since and , (19) Bounding the Term (B). When we unroll the EMA recursion of both and , Then, we compute the expectation of the Frobenius squared norm bias caused by and , where equalities are due to Assumption 2 , which states so that the cross-term vanishes. Note that . By Lemma 8 , we get By averaging over , we have (20) Plugging Eq.( 19 ) and Eq.( 20 ) to Eq.( 18 ), we obtain (21) where the last inequality is due to . Eq.( 21 ) can be expressed as By Lemma 7 and Proposition 2 (iv), we have . Therefore, Let and . Then, we have Hence (22) Insert Eq.( 22 ) into Eq.( 17 ), we obtain Therefore, provided , (23) Finally, we have (24) Tuning and . We need and . Since , a convenient sufficient choice is Applying Jensen’s inequality and using the fact that for with (Proposition 2 (iii)), we get where the last inequality is due to . By setting , which guarantees and , we obtain, By setting , we get Thus, we can find an -nuclear norm stationary point of with a complexity of ∎ Appendix D Newton–Schulz Lemmas: Proofs Remark 1 (Initial residual below one). With and , we have for every ; moreover when . Proof. Let (rank ). Then , so on the eigenvalues are . If , set . Otherwise, the minimal positive eigenvalue , hence by Lemma 1 , . ∎ Lemma 9 . (Polar factor invariance under Newton–Schulz ). As Newton–Schulz iterates by the polynomial , i.e., , , the polar factor is invariant: for all . Proof. First, the polar factor is invariant under scalar multiplication. ( Let . Then . Now, let for . Then . Thus, . Hence, holds. Now, to prove by induction on , we assume that . Note that one step of Newton–Schulz for polynomial is defined as Let with (on ), so that . Then Thus, has the same left/right singular vectors as . Hence, By induction, we have which implies the polar factor invariance under Newton–Schulz updates. ∎ Lemma 10 . (Support invariance under Newton–Schulz ). As Newton–Schulz iterates by the polynomial , i.e., , , the support is invariant: for all , and is positive definite on . Proof. On the spectrum of lies in . is strictly positive on (Proposition 1 ), so is invertible. Hence and by induction for all . ∎ Remark 2 (Support - aware details) . As in the main text, all Newton–Schulz quantities are restricted to (no standing full - rank assumption). Lemma 10 preserves the column space; , , and vanish on . Lemma 1 (Orthogonality residual vs. Polar approximation error). Let be the smallest positive eigenvalue of restricted to (set if ). Then Proof. Let and with . Then, on and vanishes on . Thus, the orthogonality residual is computed as (25) where is the smallest positive eigenvalue of on . By the polar factor invariance under Newton–Schulz updates (Lemma 9 ), we have (26) Combining Eq.( 25 ) and Eq.( 26 ), we conclude ∎ Lemma 2 (Residual update). For Newton–Schulz polynomial the orthogonality residual is updated by Newton–Schulz per step as where . Proof. Recall that Newton–Schulz update is defined as where . Let be . Then is symmetric, because Applying Newton–Schulz update, we get Since is symmetric, any polynomial is also symmetric. Thus, . Therefore, we have (27) Since is symmetric, is orthogonally diagonalizable. Let be the eigenvalues of . Hence, we can write its spectral decomposition as . By the key property of matrix polynomials, . Now, we substitute the spectral decompositions of and into Eq.( 27 ), Let the new diagonal matrix be . Then, the diagonal entries of are . The expression for , which is the spectral decomposition of . This form explicitly shows that the eigenvalues of are the diagonal entries of , which are . We conclude that on and both and vanish on . Claim: for all . For , it is trivial. Assume that holds. Then, . Hence, the largest singular value of is in , which implies all eigenvalues of symmetric are in , i.e., . Since is non-decreasing on with (Proposition 1 ), we have By induction, we get for all . The claim also implies for all . Now, recall that the orthogonality residual at step is defined as Let be the minimum eigenvalue of , i.e., . Then, by the claim, we have (28) Now, we consider the next step residual , where the last equality is due to . Since is non-decreasing on with , we have where the last equality is due to Eq.( 28 ). Therefore, we conclude that the orthogonality residual is updated by Newton–Schulz as where ∎ Lemma 3 (Residual Decay by Newton–Schulz Polynomial). For Newton–Schulz polynomial , on where is a function defined in Lemma 2 . Hence, for every and all , Proof. The Newton–Schulz polynomial of degree is defined as the truncation of the Taylor series of expanded around . This means that the first derivatives of and are identical at : Let’s consider the variable substitution . The function becomes . The polynomial is then the Taylor expansion of around up to the term : (29) The derivatives of at are , so that the coefficients are . Moreover, since and share the same first derivatives at , we get (30) Consider the function . Claim: is non-decreasing on with . holds. Now, the derivative of is With , we have . Then, we obtain (31) Since all coefficients of are positive, i.e., , we have Now, it suffices to prove for . From Eq.( 29 ), we can compute : (32) Note that the ratio for the coefficients is, Therefore, and also . Hence, all coefficients up to degree cancel in Eq.( 32 ), leaving the exact factorization (33) Putting Eq.( 33 ) into Eq.( 31 ), which is , gives Since , , and on , we have for . Moreover, for (because then ), and . Therefore, is non-decreasing on (in fact, it is strictly increasing on ), as claimed. Now, we can apply Lemma 2 , since is non-decreasing on with . From Lemma 2 , we know the orthogonality residual is updated according to the rule: (34) where the function is defined as: (35) Claim: for all . The function can be rewritten using and : (36) Let’s define a remainder function , which represents the difference between and its Taylor approximation : (37) Since matches the derivatives of up to order at , which implies Eq.( 30 ), the remainder function and its first derivatives are all zero at : (38) Substituting from Eq.( 37 ) to Eq.( 36 ), Let’s define the term in the brackets as a new function, : So, we have a simple product form: . Note that is well-behaved around since and , making the denominator non-zero. To find the derivatives of , we use the Leibniz rule (the generalized product rule) for the -th derivative of a product: Now, we evaluate this -th derivative at : Let’s consider any integer in the range . In the summation above, the index runs from to . For every term in this sum, the condition holds. From Eq.( 38 ), we know that for all . Therefore, every single term in the summation contains a factor of which is equal to zero. This result holds for all . Thus, we have proven that the first derivatives of at are all zero: This implies that the Taylor series for starts with a term of order : Find the leading term of . Recall that we can express using the Taylor remainder theorem: (39) where is the remainder term, which is of order . Substituting Eq.( 39 ) into the expression for in Eq.( 35 ): The remainder is given by for some . As , the leading term of is determined by . The derivatives of at are . Thus, the leading coefficient of the Taylor series for is: For any , this coefficient is less than . For example, for , . In general, using Stirling’s approximation , we have: Since and the leading coefficient is less than , there exists a sufficiently small such that for all . Specifically, you can choose any and take so that on . Then (40) which makes the "exists " completely explicit. Combining the recursion Eq.( 34 ) and Eq.( 40 ), we have After steps, we obtain the final result by repeated application: Finally, we conclude: This establishes that the orthogonality residual decays with an order of at each step of the Newton–Schulz if Newton–Schulz polynomial is of degree . ∎ Corollary 1 (Final constant factor bound) . Let (Remark 1 ). Then for all and , Proof. Combine Lemma 3 with Lemma 1 . ∎ Corollary 2 (Case when ) . For the polynomials and , the residual recursion specializes to and for all . These are concrete instances of the general residual map in Lemma 2 . Proof. Direct substitution into gives since on for . Also, since on for (check at ). ∎ D.1 Detailed proofs for case when Residual Decay by 1st-order Newton–Schulz Polynomial. Define the polynomial for Newton–Schulz steps as Then for any fixed and any , the residual satisfies Consequently, if is sufficiently small for all , then for all . Proof. Deriving the function in Lemma 2 , Then the derivative of is Since for and , we can apply Lemma 2 . The orthogonality residual is updated by one Newton–Schulz step as By induction, after steps, we get the relationship, . Given the assumption that for all , the conclusion follows directly: This shows that the orthogonality residual decreases quadratically with each iteration, which is a very rapid rate of convergence. ∎ Residual Decay by 2nd-order Newton–Schulz Polynomial. Define the polynomial for Newton–Schulz steps as Then for any fixed and any , the residual satisfies Consequently, if is sufficiently small for all , then for all . Proof. Deriving the function in Lemma 2 , Then the derivative of is Since for and , we can apply Lemma 2 . The orthogonality residual is updated by one Newton–Schulz step as By induction, after steps, we get the relationship, . Given the assumption that for all , the conclusion follows directly: This shows that the orthogonality residual decreases cubically with each iteration, which is a very rapid rate of convergence. ∎ Appendix E Wall-Clock via Computational Complexity. At each iteration , Muon performs an orthogonalization of the momentum matrix via either or Newton–Schulz (NS). We write for the effective GEMM throughput (FLOP/s), and for the effective throughput of the routine. In practice due to far higher hardware utilization of GEMM. Per-iteration Orthogonalization FLOPs. For a single layer index by with (for , apply to and transpose-trick): • Muon with SVD. A thin of and extracting the polar factor costs ( Golub and Reinsch, 1971 ) : Wall-clock time per layer is . • Muon with NS ( -steps, -degree). Newton–Schulz follows Horner’s rule when recursively updating the scaled momentum matrix using the Newton–Schulz polynomial. Newton–Schulz forms and applies the degree- polynomial to via Horner’s rule. Each NS step needs one by GEMM to build and multiplies (each by ). Hence, Wall-clock time per layer is . Lemma 11 . For a layer with , the wall-clock time ratio between Muon with and Muon with Newton–Schulz ( -steps, -degree) is, Discussion of Lemma 11 . With the practical setting and , the algebraic factor is , so the wall-clock speedup is essentially the GEMM/ efficiency ratio. On modern GPUs, is often , so NS typically yields a multi- speedup per iteration over , matching empirical observations in Figure 1 . Practical Interpretation. Newton–Schulz scales linearly in (accuracy knob) and uses only GEMMs, which map efficiently to GPUs. Exact SVD pays an additional term and typically incurs larger constants. Hence for small and modest , Newton–Schulz is substantially cheaper per update than a full SVD while achieving near-exact orthogonalization in practice. Appendix F Numerical Experiments Detail F.1 Experimental Setting Task and metric. All experiments are conducted on CIFAR - 10 (50k train / 10k test) with the standard channel - wise normalization and . We report cross - entropy train loss and test loss. Plots show the over independent runs, and we also report the wall-clock time (in seconds) accumulated from the beginning of training. Model. We use a compact convolutional network ( CifarNet , approximately parameters): a fixed whitening convolution (weights frozen, bias trainable), followed by three ConvGroups (each: conv MaxPool2d(2) GELU conv GELU) with widths and a linear head. BatchNorm layers keep affine weights frozen (biases are trainable). For stability, the first portion of each convolution is Dirac-initialized, and the linear head is variance-normalized. Hyperparameters and schedules. Unless stated otherwise, we train for epochs with a batch size of on the GPU (the CPU fallback uses ). Each run uses a different seed. • Main optimizer (one of Muon , Muon ( ), or SGD -M) on convolutional filters: learning rate , momentum . • Auxiliary SGD (whitening bias, BatchNorm biases, linear head): learning rates and with momentum (Nesterov). • Label smoothing , and gradient clipping . • Schedule: The same warm - up + cosine schedule is applied to all optimizers: a 5% linear warm - up of total steps followed by cosine decay to . Schedulers step once per update. Evaluation. At the end of each epoch, we evaluate the test loss using the same normalization (no augmentation). We record (i) epoch-wise training loss, (ii) test loss, and (iii) the cumulative wall-clock time. Results are aggregated across runs. Figures report and include both epoch-aligned and time-aligned views to disentangle statistical and systemic effects. F.2 Newton–Schulz steps ( ) ablations. Optimizers under comparison. We compare: 1. Muon -step : SGD with momentum followed by an orthogonalization of the momentum matrix using Newton–Schulz steps (Algorithm 1 ); . The case is a normalization - only ablation (no orthogonalization). 2. Muon ( ) : Muon with an exact polar step via . 3. SGD -M : SGD with momentum baseline with identical schedules. All methods share identical schedules and auxiliary updates (Appendix F.1 ). Orthogonalization details. For Muon with - Newton–Schulz steps, we use Newton–Schulz polynomial, applied as with and ; if the matrix is tall, we employ the transpose trick. The variant normalizes by its Frobenius norm and returns . In all Muon variants, each weight tensor is re-normalized once per step to the Frobenius norm to stabilize scales. Ablations on . Our main comparison varies the number of Newton–Schulz steps while holding the polynomial fixed to , and contrasts these with Muon with and SGD -M. All other components (architecture, schedules, augmentation) are kept identical across methods to ensure a fair comparison. Appendix G Additional Numerical Experiments Optimizers compared: • SGD with Momentum • Muon (Newton–Schulz) with 1, 2, 3 steps per update • Muon with exact SVD (polar factor) Dataset and Model: • MNIST (60K) / MLP (0.5M) • CIFAR-10 (50K) / CifarNet (2M) : Main text • CIFAR-100 (50K) / ResNet-18 (11.2M) • Tiny-ImageNet (100K) / WideResNet-28-10 (36.6M) • FineWeb (10M tokens from sample-10BT) / NanoGPT (124.2M) & GPT-2 (1.3B) – block_size = 1024 – num_blocks = (10M - 1) // 1024 = 9,765 sequences (for causal LM) – n_layer: 12 & 24 (transformer blocks) – n_head: 12 & 16 – n_embd: 768 & 2048 – Vocab size: tokenizer.vocab_size from GPT2TokenizerFast (50257) – Token embedding: nn.Embedding(vocab_size, 768) – Positional embedding: nn.Embedding(block_size, 768) – Each of the 12 transformer blocks * LayerNorm multi-head causal self-attention (QKV + output projection) residual * LayerNorm 4 -wide MLP (3072 hidden) residual – Final LayerNorm – Total n_params: 124.2M & 1313.63M (1.31B) Hyper-parameters • MLP on MNIST: – model: 784 512 256 10 – learning rate: 0.08; momentum: 0.7 – 256 batch size; 50 epochs, 5 runs • ResNet-18 on CIFAR-100: – model: torchvision.models.resnet18 – learning rate: 0.08; momentum: 0.7 – 512 batch size; 50 epochs, 5 runs • WideResNet-28-10 on Tiny-ImageNet: – model: WideResNet(depth=28, widen_factor=10, num_classes=200, drop_rate=0.0) – learning rate: 0.08; momentum: 0.7 – 128 batch size; 30 epochs, 3 runs • NanoGPT & GPT-1.3B on FineWeb: – model: NanoGPT & GPT-1.3B – learning rate: 0.02; momentum: 0.95; batch size: 8 – 10M training tokens, 1M validation tokens – 8 RTX-3090 GPUs – max steps: 6000 G.1 MLP on MNIST Figure 2: Train losses of MLP on MNIST across wall-clock time and epochs Table 2: Wall-clock time training performance of MLP (0.5M) on MNIST dataset Wall-clock time train loss Optimizer 50 sec 100 sec 150 sec 200 sec 250 sec SGD-M 0.550 0.525 0.517 0.514 0.513 Muon with SVD 0.616 0.612 0.600 0.583 0.565 Muon ( =1) 0.526 0.514 0.506 0.502 0.501 Muon ( =2) 0.532 0.518 0.509 0.503 0.501 Muon ( =3) 0.548 0.529 0.511 0.503 0.501 G.2 CifarNet on CIFAR-10 Figure 3: Train losses of CifarNet on CIFAR-10 across wall-clock time and epochs Table 3: Wall-clock time training performance of CifarNet (2M) on CIFAR-10 Wall-clock time train loss Optimizer 10 sec 20 sec 30 sec 40 sec 50 sec 60 sec SGD-M 1.366 1.157 1.084 1.045 1.021 1.010 Muon with SVD 2.211 1.334 1.227 1.207 1.193 1.182 Muon ( =1) 1.130 1.014 0.945 0.905 0.888 0.884 Muon ( =2) 1.129 1.064 1.001 0.932 0.888 0.876 Muon ( =3) 1.191 1.145 1.079 0.990 0.905 0.876 G.3 ResNet-18 on CIFAR-100 Figure 4: Train losses of ResNet-18 on CIFAR-100 across wall-clock time and epochs Table 4: Wall-clock time training performance of ResNet-18 (11.2M) on CIFAR-100 Wall-clock time train loss Optimizer 100 sec 200 sec 300 sec 400 sec 500 sec SGD-M 3.096 2.612 2.324 2.157 2.072 Muon with SVD 3.202 2.767 2.668 2.594 2.522 Muon ( =1) 2.427 1.986 1.716 1.563 1.514 Muon ( =2) 2.407 2.127 1.826 1.584 1.495 Muon ( =3) 2.554 2.329 1.985 1.624 1.481 G.4 WideResNet-28-10 on Tiny-ImageNet Figure 5: Train losses of WideResNet-28-10 on Tiny-ImageNet across wall-clock time and epochs Table 5: Wall-clock time training performance of WideResNet-28-10 (36.6M) on Tiny-ImageNet Wall-clock time train loss Optimizer 400 sec 800 sec 1200 sec 1600 sec 2000 sec SGD-M 4.694 4.299 4.045 3.914 3.857 Muon with SVD 4.267 4.020 3.846 3.734 3.520 Muon ( =1) 4.035 3.369 2.903 2.495 2.144 Muon ( =2) 3.766 3.246 2.815 2.311 1.856 Muon ( =3) 3.666 3.317 2.929 2.372 1.800 G.5 NanoGPT on FineWeb Figure 6: Train losses of NanoGPT on FineWeb across wall-clock time and epochs Table 6: Wall-clock time training performance of NanoGPT (124M) on FineWeb Wall-clock time train loss Optimizer 100 sec 200 sec 300 sec 400 sec 500 sec 600 sec SGD-M 10.938 7.656 6.000 5.375 4.938 4.594 Muon with SVD 10.250 9.188 8.625 8.062 7.594 7.125 Muon ( =1) 5.969 4.094 2.469 1.367 0.879 0.637 Muon ( =2) 5.000 2.344 1.047 0.395 0.157 0.030 Muon ( =3) 3.984 2.125 1.180 0.523 0.142 0.026 G.6 GPT-2 based model (1.3B) on FineWeb Figure 7: Train losses of GPT-2 based model (1.3B) on FineWeb across wall-clock time and epochs Table 7: Wall-clock time training performance of GPT-2 based model (1.3B) on FineWeb Wall-clock time train loss Optimizer 600 sec 1200 sec 1800 sec 2400 sec 3000 sec 3600 sec SGD-M 6.4062 5.3750 4.2812 3.2969 2.4219 2.0156 Muon with SVD 8.2280 8.0810 7.9340 7.7870 7.6400 7.4930 Muon ( =1) 6.0625 3.5156 1.0781 0.1436 0.1338 0.0109 Muon ( =2) 5.1562 2.8906 0.5898 0.1133 0.0349 0.0113 Muon ( =3) 5.6562 3.2031 1.2188 0.4609 0.1201 0.0286 Appendix H Additional Ablation Experiments H.1 Newton–Schulz –polynomial degree- ablations. Figure 8: Degree sweep. Newton–Schulz polynomial degree at fixed . Larger improves train/test loss but increases time per step. Beyond the step - sweep in Fig. 1 , we perform a controlled ablation that varies the degree of the Newton–Schulz polynomial while fixing the number of Newton–Schulz steps to for all variants. Concretely, we instantiate a family of Muon with degree- polynomial optimizers whose orthogonalization step applies, per layer, the update where is the momentum matrix, and is the degree - Newton–Schulz polynomial that matches the derivatives of at up to order . The coefficients are generated analytically from the Taylor series of at , ensuring the residual recursion (Lemma 3 ). Tall matrices are handled using the transpose trick. Ablation on degree . Fixing , increasing the degree improves optimization (loss drops faster at a fixed epoch) but lengthens each step, yielding a clear accuracy–time trade-off (see Fig. 8 ). (This mirrors the theory that the residual contracts as (Lemma 3 ), while computation scales with polynomial evaluations.) Compared optimizers. We evaluate under a fixed iteration budget . This ablation isolates the effect of the polynomial degree at a fixed step , directly testing the theory-driven prediction that larger accelerates orthogonality residual decay (see Table 1 ). H.2 Rank–dependence. Figure 9: Rank dependence. Epoch - averaged gradient norm vs. rank (left: raw log–log; right: normalized by ). Muon variants are nearly - invariant; SGD -M scales up with rank. Table 8: log–log slopes ( ) from Fig. 9 . Method (raw) (normalized by ) SGD -M Muon (SVD) Muon (NS) Rank dependence. We vary the monitored layer’s effective rank and plot the epoch-averaged on a log–log scale. SGD -M shows a positive slope (grows with ), whereas Muon and its variants are nearly flat. After normalizing by , the two Muon variants follow the predicted trend, while SGD -M remains non-flat (see Fig. 9 ). Goal and prediction. We test how the nuclear–norm of the per–step gradient on a monitored layer scales with the layer’s dimension parameter for a weight . The theory predicts that orthogonalizing the momentum suppresses the - growth which occurs in either Muon with Newton–Schulz or Muon with , while SGD -M has dependence. Controlling . We vary the out - channels of the first convolution in the first ConvGroup and keep all other widths fixed. For this layer, the weight tensor has shape with (from the fixed "whitening" conv). Flattening by rows yields a matrix of shape with and , so . We sweep , hence . Optimizers under comparison. We compare: • SGD -M (baseline), • Muon ( ) (exact polar ), and • Muon ( ) with Newton–Schulz steps. All methods share identical schedules and auxiliary updates (Appendix F.1 ). Results. Across , SGD -M exhibits a positive log–log slope (about ), while both Muon variants are nearly flat. After dividing by , the Muon curves show a slope of about ( Muon with : -0.4 and Muon with Newton–Schulz : -0.61) , as predicted, whereas SGD -M becomes almost flat (slope with ). H.3 Batch size ablations. We sweep with Muon ( ) under identical schedules and report epoch–aligned and time–aligned views (Fig. 10 ). The schedule is step–based, so larger implies fewer total steps over epochs. We report both epoch–aligned and wall–clock-aligned curves. From a systems perspective, increasing improves throughput up to a regime of diminishing returns. From an optimization perspective, a larger reduces gradient noise but also decreases the frequency of orthogonalization steps per epoch ( ). In our runs, the best time–to-accuracy is achieved for a large batch size , while a small suffers from noise, taking a greater amount of time. Figure 10: Batch size. Train/test loss vs. epoch and wall - clock for . H.4 Degree-2 NS polynomial vs. Ad-hoc degree-2 NS polynomial Figure 11: NS polynomial vs. Ad-hoc polynomial. Train/test loss vs. epoch and wall - clock. Analysis of Let and . The statement that is monotone non-decreasing on is false, and the underlying condition that is also not met. On the interval , the range of is . Since this range is not contained within , the premise is false. A function is monotone non-decreasing if its derivative is greater than or equal to zero over the entire interval. The derivative of is: To check for monotonicity, we can evaluate the derivative at the endpoints of the interval : • At : • At : Since and , the derivative changes from positive to negative within the interval. This means the function increases for a portion of the interval and then decreases. Therefore, the claim that is monotone non-decreasing on is false. The function has a local maximum at approximately . Hence, the monotonicity premise of Lemma 2 fails for , even though holds. This explains why our guarantees apply to but not to the ad-hoc quadratic, which remains an empirical heuristic. Experimental support, please view the build logs for errors. Generated by L A T E xml . Instructions for reporting errors We are continuing to improve HTML versions of papers, and your feedback helps enhance accessibility and mobile support. To report errors in the HTML that will help us improve conversion and rendering, choose any of the methods listed below: Click the "Report Issue" ( ) button, located in the page header. Tip: You can select the relevant text first, to include it in your report. Our team has already identified the following issues . We appreciate your time reviewing and reporting rendering errors we may not have found yet. Your efforts will help us improve the HTML versions for all readers, because disability should not be a barrier to accessing research. Thank you for your continued support in championing open access for all. Have a free development cycle? Help support accessibility at arXiv! Our collaborators at LaTeXML maintain a list of packages that need conversion , and welcome developer contributions . We gratefully acknowledge support from our major funders , member institutions , , and all contributors. About · Help · Contact · Subscribe · Copyright · Privacy · Accessibility · Operational Status (opens in new tab) Major funding support from