Cost-free Spectral Estimation for Adaptive Newton–Schulz in Matrix Optimizers Report GitHub Issue × Title: Content selection saved. Describe the issue below: Description: Submit without GitHub Submit in GitHub arXiv is now an independent nonprofit! Learn more × Back to arXiv Why HTML? Report Issue Back to Abstract Download PDF Abstract 1 Introduction 2 Matrix functions in optimization 2.1 From matrix updates to spectral transformations 2.2 Newton–Schulz and optimal polynomial iterations 3 Spectrum-dependent cost of Newton–Schulz 3.1 Broader design intervals require more computation 3.2 Training produces different spectra across layers and time 3.3 Spectral information identifies unnecessary work 4 Spectral estimation from Newton–Schulz 4.1 Moments from the Newton–Schulz computation 4.2 Fitting a spectrum to the measured moments 4.3 What the fitted spectrum can predict 4.4 Selecting a Polar Express routine 5 Experiments 5.1 Orthogonalization of real spectra 5.2 LLM pretraining 6 Conclusion References A Proofs A.1 Proof of Singular values below the scoring cutoff. A.2 Proof of A.3 Proof of and accuracy of selection From integrals to selection. B Method details B.1 Input normalization B.2 Candidates and fitting Ambiguity of the fitted spectrum. B.3 Periodic measurement C Offline experiments C.1 Data C.2 Fitted spectra across layers and training C.3 Fixed-depth errors and the choice of score C.4 Held-out run C.5 Ablations Measurements. Scoring cutoff. Estimator settings. C.6 Target rule C.7 Reuse and per-type selection D Cost E Inverse square roots F Pretraining details F.1 Setup F.2 Matrix-function routines Muon. OKLS. Comparisons. F.3 Additional pretraining results Measurement period. Practitioner endpoint. F.4 Selection quality during training G Related work Polynomial iterations for matrix functions. Adapting the iteration to the matrix. Inexact orthogonalization. Spectral density estimation from moments. License: CC BY 4.0 arXiv:2609.33047v1 [cs.LG] 27 Sep 2026 Cost-free Spectral Estimation for Adaptive Newton–Schulz in Matrix Optimizers Kristi Topollai Affiliation: New York University Email: kt2664@nyu.edu Anna Choromanska Affiliation: New York University Email: ac5455@nyu.edu Abstract Matrix optimizers such as Muon transform each momentum matrix through an approximate orthogonalization, typically implemented by a small number of Newton–Schulz matrix multiplications. The quality and cost of this approximation depend strongly on the singular-value spectrum of its input, yet existing implementations use the same fixed polynomial routine for every layer and throughout training. We show that this uniform treatment is unnecessary: the computations in the Newton–Schulz method already reveal enough information to make the method adaptive. The Gram matrices formed inside Newton–Schulz iterations yield spectral moments through inexpensive scalar reductions, requiring no additional matrix multiplications. From these moments, we recover an estimate of the empirical singular-value distribution and use it to select a polynomial routine specialized to the current matrix. This turns Newton–Schulz orthogonalization into a spectrum-adaptive procedure that responds to differences across both layers and training time. On saved momentum matrices, spectral estimation substantially reduces orthogonalization error at a fixed iteration budget or reaches the same accuracy with fewer iterations, and in GPT pretraining up to 1B parameters it lowers the validation loss of two matrix optimizers. Our results suggest that matrix-function operations inside optimizers need not be designed for a conservative worst-case spectrum: they can cheaply measure the spectrum they are already processing and specialize computations accordingly. 1 Introduction Matrix optimizers are an increasingly practical alternative to elementwise optimization for neural-network training. Methods such as Shampoo ( Gupta et al., 2018 ; Anil et al., 2020 ) , SOAP ( Vyas et al., 2025 ) , Dion ( Ahn et al., 2025 ) , and Muon ( Jordan et al., 2024 ; Liu et al., 2025 ) exploit matrix structure in gradients, momentum, or preconditioning statistics rather than treating every parameter independently. Muon has attracted substantial attention for language-model pretraining, where it approximately orthogonalizes momentum matrices before using them as updates. Recent large-scale systems have adopted Muon or closely related matrix-optimization ideas, including DeepSeek-V4, GLM-5, and Kimi K3 ( DeepSeek-AI, 2026 ; GLM-5 Team, 2026 ; Kimi Team, 2026 ) , and practical studies show that Muon is competitive at language-model scale ( Essential AI, 2025 ; Liu et al., 2025 ) . Figure 1: Newton–Schulz can measure its input and specialize its own computation. (a) Full singular-value CDFs show different momentum spectra for attention Q and MLP-up at layer , step k. (b) Read moments from existing matrix products, fit the spectrum, and select a routine for subsequent steps. (c) On saved MLP matrices, spectral estimation reduces mean polar RMS error by relative to fixed Polar Express (PE) at iterations, scored above in Frobenius-normalized coordinates. This growing use of matrix optimizers makes the cost of their internal matrix functions increasingly important. Muon approximately computes the polar factor of each momentum matrix with a small number of Newton–Schulz iterations, replacing an SVD with hardware-efficient matrix multiplications ( Higham, 2008 ; Amsel et al., 2026a ) . Online KL Shampoo (OKLS) ( Zhang et al., 2026a ) similarly computes the inverse square roots of its preconditioner statistics with a coupled Newton–Schulz iteration. Recent work improves these iterations through better polynomial design and scaling ( Grishina et al., 2025 ; Amsel et al., 2026a ) , but typically applies the same routine across matrices. This can be wasteful because the difficulty of the approximation depends strongly on the input spectrum, and momentum spectra vary across matrix types, layers, and training time, with attention often substantially broader than MLPs. A conservative routine that handles the hardest cases can spend unnecessary iterations on easier ones. Several recent methods have begun to exploit this heterogeneity. AMO adapts orthogonalization at the matrix-type level using an observe-then-commit strategy ( Zhuang et al., 2026 ) , while PRISM adapts matrix-function computation using randomized spectral information during the iterations ( Yang et al., 2026 ) . Appendix G reviews related work. The best matrix-function routine depends on the spectrum it is applied to, so exploiting this during training requires spectral information that is cheap to obtain. Newton–Schulz already contains such information. Its intermediate matrices encode measurements of the input singular-value distribution that can be extracted through inexpensive scalar reductions, without additional matrix multiplications. We use them to estimate enough of the spectrum to select a better-matched routine, a procedure we call spectral estimation ( Figure 1 ). We make three contributions. • We show that the intermediate matrices of Newton–Schulz yield spectral measurements at negligible cost. They need no additional matrix multiplications, and fitting a spectrum to them costs the same at every matrix size, unlike an SVD. • We use these measurements to build a spectrum-adaptive Newton–Schulz procedure that selects a polynomial routine for each matrix instead of one conservative choice. • We evaluate spectral estimation both offline on saved language-model momentum matrices and end-to-end in GPT pretraining. Offline, it substantially improves polar approximation at a fixed iteration budget or reaches the same accuracy with fewer Newton–Schulz iterations. In pretraining, it improves two different matrix optimizers, Muon and OKLS. 2 Matrix functions in optimization 2.1 From matrix updates to spectral transformations Matrix optimizers act on gradients, momentum, or preconditioning statistics through matrix-valued transformations. Examples include Muon ( Jordan et al., 2024 ; Liu et al., 2025 ) , Dion ( Ahn et al., 2025 ) , AdaMuon ( Si et al., 2025 ) , and Shampoo-style methods ( Gupta et al., 2018 ; Anil et al., 2020 ; Vyas et al., 2025 ) . Muon is our main example. For a momentum matrix , its ideal update is the polar factor , which preserves singular-vector directions while mapping every nonzero singular value to one ( Jordan et al., 2024 ) . Other matrix optimizers apply different spectral transformations. Shampoo and SOAP construct dense preconditioners from matrix-valued second-moment statistics, typically using eigendecomposition or related dense linear algebra ( Gupta et al., 2018 ; Anil et al., 2020 ; Vyas et al., 2025 ) . OKLS instead computes inverse square roots of those statistics using a coupled Newton–Schulz iteration ( Zhang et al., 2026a ) . Both orthogonalization and dense preconditioning reduce to evaluating matrix functions such as the polar factor, inverse roots, or related spectral powers. Direct SVDs or eigendecompositions make these functions easy to define but expensive to evaluate repeatedly during training. Newton–Schulz and related polynomial iterations replace them with short sequences of matrix multiplications that map efficiently to GPUs ( Higham, 2008 ; Amsel et al., 2026a ) . We focus on polar approximation, while coupled variants provide analogous routes to inverse roots and fractional powers ( Higham, 1997 ; Qi et al., 2026 ) . 2.2 Newton–Schulz and optimal polynomial iterations Newton–Schulz orthogonalization applies a sequence of low-degree polynomials to the singular values of a matrix. The classical update drives normalized positive singular values toward one ( Björck and Bowie, 1971 ; Kovarik, 1970 ) . Modern variants accelerate this process through improved scaling and higher-degree polynomial iterations ( Chen and Chow, 2014 ; Amsel et al., 2026a ; Grishina et al., 2025 ) . Orient so that , and let be a rescaling whose singular values lie in . A quintic iteration takes the form (1) If , then after iterations, (2) The matrix iteration is therefore determined by its scalar response , and the coefficients set how quickly singular values move toward one without changing an iteration’s matrix-multiplication pattern. Polar Express (PE) chooses these coefficients by minimizing worst-case approximation error over a prescribed spectral interval ( Amsel et al., 2026a ) . For an iteration with design interval , (3) If the resulting error is , the next iteration is designed for the output interval . This greedy construction is optimal among compositions of the same depth and degree ( Amsel et al., 2026a , Theorem 3.1) , and CANS similarly uses Chebyshev-type design ( Grishina et al., 2025 ) . This optimality is relative to the chosen spectral interval. For an initial design interval , rescaling the upper endpoint to one leaves the ratio as the only relevant quantity. A broader interval therefore defines a harder problem. 3 Spectrum-dependent cost of Newton–Schulz 3.1 Broader design intervals require more computation The following result shows how widening the design interval degrades the best error at fixed depth. Theorem 1 (Interval width and minimax error) . Let be the minimum uniform error on over all compositions of odd polynomials of degree at most five, and write for the one-iteration error. In exact arithmetic, ideal PE attains this minimum, and for (4) For and , (5) By Theorem 1 , a broader interval gives strictly larger minimax error at every fixed depth. As , the error approaches one, so achieving a fixed target accuracy eventually requires more iterations. The proof and corresponding depth bound are in Section A.2 . Figure 2 shows the effect directly. Broader intervals leave more error at the same depth because the polynomial must amplify small singular values while remaining bounded on the upper end. Narrower ones reach low error sooner. Figure 2: Wider design intervals require more iterations. Ideal PE on . (a) Optimal uniform error versus depth. (b,c) Composed responses at and . Shading marks . 3.2 Training produces different spectra across layers and time Orthogonalization difficulty varies across matrix types, layers, and training time ( Zhuang et al., 2026 ) . Figure 3 shows this for attention-query and MLP-up matrices of the M Muon baseline of our pretraining experiments. Attention spectra are broader and MLP spectra more concentrated, and both vary across layers and training. A single conservative interval must cover all of these cases, even where it contains little spectral mass for a given matrix. Figure 3: Spectra vary across layers and training. CDFs of the M Muon baseline. (a,b) Q and MLP-up across layers at step k. (c,d) Layer across checkpoints. The dotted line marks . 3.3 Spectral information identifies unnecessary work An oracle that knows the exact nonzero spectral range can design PE for . Figure 4 compares this with a common conservative interval. Attention still requires a relatively deep iteration, but the narrower MLP spectrum can reach the same target in far fewer iterations. Figure 4: A conservative interval spends unnecessary work on narrow spectra. Q and MLP-up at layer , step k. The common interval is , and the exact interval is each matrix’s nonzero spectral range, as used by an oracle. Labels show the first depth reaching . Endpoints determine the best uniform guarantee, but average error depends on where the spectral mass lies. For normalized nonzero singular values , define (6) This is the squared relative Frobenius error to the polar factor. Minimizing worst-case error need not minimize this average, since allowing larger error in a sparse tail can improve accuracy over the bulk ( Fan et al., 2020 ) . We therefore use spectral information beyond the endpoints to score candidate routines. Obtaining this information is usually expensive. An exact SVD of costs in sequential steps that map poorly to GPUs, and this cost grows with the matrix size. Newton–Schulz provides this information without extra matrix products, at a cost that stays nearly constant as matrices grow ( Section 4 ). 4 Spectral estimation from Newton–Schulz Choosing the best routine requires information about the input spectrum, and computing it with an SVD would defeat the purpose. If an SVD were affordable at every step, we could compute the polar factor directly. Instead, Newton–Schulz itself lets us estimate the spectrum cheaply. We collect the measurements during a measurement pass and reuse the chosen routine over subsequent steps. For nonzero , let and , where upper-bounds . Then and is the empirical scaled spectrum, including zeros. 4.1 Moments from the Newton–Schulz computation Measurement pass 1: , coefficients 2: for do 3: (1) 4: (2) 5: 6: 7: 8: (3) 9: end for 10: Read (1)–(3) are existing matrix products. Purple marks added scalar reductions. Newton–Schulz already forms the matrices needed to read spectral moments. At iteration , the intermediate matrices and expose the even moments of orders two through eight using only scalar reductions. No additional matrix multiplication is required. Because each iteration applies a different polynomial transform, successive readouts measure different views of the same input spectrum ( Weiße et al., 2006 ; Lin et al., 2016 ) . To see this, write and define , , and . Then Equation 1 gives (7) Since is symmetric, and , giving (8) The cost of these reductions grows only with the smaller matrix dimension and is a vanishing fraction of each iteration ( Appendix D ). Proposition 1 (Spectral moments from the iteration) . In exact arithmetic, (9) For , this gives four measurements per iteration. The final output contributes for scalar measurements in total. Each pair therefore defines a known measurement function with observation . These functions constrain several transformed views of the same spectrum from one pass. We choose using the CANS Gram-power upper bound ( Grishina et al., 2025 , Section 3.3) , reusing the first-iteration products, which safely bounds the spectrum from above. 4.2 Fitting a spectrum to the measured moments We recover a discrete spectral measure from the measurement functions using a maximum-entropy moment fit ( Mead and Papanicolaou, 1984 ; Silver and Röder, 1997 ) . Place masses on grid points , and define . Then gives the predicted measurements. We enforce normalization and the known second moment by restricting to (10) Because discretization and measurement error may preclude an exact match, we first minimize the weighted residual, then select the maximum-entropy fit within tolerance . With measured values , row scales that put them on a common scale, and , (11) Both problems are convex. When several grid distributions match the measurements, the entropy objective selects a unique representative. Figure 5 compares the fitted measures with the SVD spectra. The fit captures broad attention and concentrated MLP spectra, with close agreement in cumulative mass. Figure 5: Moment fits recover useful spectral structure. Four matrices at layer , step k. The top row shows the density in and the bottom row the CDF, both conditioned on . 4.3 What the fitted spectrum can predict We do not need to recover the spectrum uniquely, only to predict the spectral quantities used to score candidate routines. Although finitely many moments may not identify a distribution ( Krein and Nudel’man, 1977 ) , they can determine a particular spectral average when its integrand is well represented by the measurements ( Braverman et al., 2022 ) . Theorem 2 (Prediction from the fitted spectrum) . Let be the true spectral measure on , and let be the measurement functions with observations satisfying . Let solve Equation 11 and define . For any bounded measurable and any affine combination of the measurement functions , define . Then, with and , as in Equation 11 , (12) The three terms capture how well is represented by the measured functions, error in the observed values, and the fit residual. In exact arithmetic the reductions are exact, so and the middle term covers only numerical error. If lies in their affine span and the fitted moments are exact, its spectral average is recovered exactly even when the spectrum is not uniquely determined. 4.4 Selecting a Polar Express routine The fitted spectrum thus predicts the averages that determine candidate quality, and we use it to score a precomputed set of PE routines. Each entry is a complete PE sequence with response , designed for . Here only sets the routine’s design interval. All candidates are scored on the same spectral interval , where is fixed in Frobenius-normalized coordinates. Their true and predicted squared RMS errors are (13) Since candidate responses are precomputed, scoring needs only scalar operations on the fitted spectrum, with no candidate matrix runs. The same scores support two objectives. The fixed-depth rule picks the best routine at a given depth , . The target rule picks the shortest routine predicted to meet an accuracy , , and falls back to fixed PE at the largest allowed depth if no candidate meets . Figure 6 illustrates both choices. These three steps, measure, fit, and select, make up spectral estimation. Beyond early training, spectra change gradually, so we measure every steps and reuse the selected routine in between. Offline, we instead fit each saved checkpoint independently. Figure 6: One set of predicted scores supports both objectives. MLP-up, layer , step k. (a) Predicted errors, with the best depth- endpoint (circle) and the shortest routine meeting (star). (b) Predicted and SVD-evaluated errors of the selected routines. Values below are shown at that floor. 5 Experiments 5.1 Orthogonalization of real spectra We evaluate saved Muon momentum spectra from a FineWeb run ( Penedo et al., 2024 ) . Baselines are fixed conservative PE on ( Amsel et al., 2026a ) and a minimax oracle. Using the exact spectrum, the oracle selects from the same candidate set the routine with the smallest worst-case error , where spans the scored singular values. Spectral estimation instead minimizes predicted RMS error, which the fitted spectrum predicts more reliably than worst-case error, so we report both errors. Both share normalization, candidate set, and scoring interval. Offline moments are computed exactly from the saved spectra, and bf16 measurements give nearly the same selections ( Section F.4 ). At fixed depth, selection reduces RMS error most strongly on MLP matrices ( Figures 7 and 2 ). Because it targets RMS error, spectral estimation has lower RMS error than the minimax oracle on attention through and on MLP through , while the oracle has lower worst-case error at every depth. With a target accuracy, spectral estimation picks shorter routines than fixed PE, especially for MLP matrices ( Figure 7 c–d, Table 2 ). Figure 7: Offline accuracy and depth. Means over attention and MLP matrices, scored above in Frobenius-normalized coordinates. (a–b) Polar RMS error at fixed depth ( Table 2 ). (c–d) Iterations needed to meet a target ( Table 2 ). Ours meets in predicted RMS error, the oracle in worst-case error, and fixed PE is the uniform depth that meets . Table 1: Fixed-depth polar error. Mean per-matrix RMS and worst-case error (minimax oracle). RMS error Worst-case error Fixed PE Ours Oracle Fixed PE Ours Oracle Attention MLP Table 2: Mean depth at target (ours in predicted RMS error, oracle in worst-case error). Attention MLP Ours Oracle 5.2 LLM pretraining We pretrain GPT-style decoder-only language models ( Radford et al., 2019 ) with M, M, and B non-embedding parameters on B tokens of Nemotron-CC v2 High-Quality ( NVIDIA, 2025a ; NVIDIA, 2025b ) , using the experimental setup of Zhang et al. (2026a) with minor changes ( Section F.1 ). Muon and OKLS need different matrix functions. Muon needs the polar factor of each momentum matrix, and OKLS the inverse square roots of Kronecker-factored second-moment statistics, computed by a coupled Newton–Schulz iteration. Our method handles both with the same measure, fit, and select procedure, changing only the measured products and candidate routines ( Appendix E ), so it is not specific to orthogonalization. Each run fixes the depth of ordinary (non-measurement) steps and varies only the routine. With the fixed-depth RMS rule of Section 4.4 , our method selects among -iteration routines that differ only in their endpoint , namely with for Muon and cubic inverse-root routines with for OKLS. The oracle selects from the same set by the minimax rule every steps. The fixed baseline is for Muon and, for OKLS, the cubic routine for eigenvalues above . Table 3: Pretraining across optimizers and sizes. Final validation loss, , B tokens, with for ours. Table 4: Muon 160M across depths. Final validation loss. Muon OKLS Size Fixed Oracle Ours Fixed Oracle Ours 160M 300M 1B Fixed Ours Spectral estimation improves on the fixed baseline for both optimizers at every model size, and it matches or improves on periodic selection from an exact SVD or eigendecomposition ( Tables 4 and 8 ). We also vary the depth of ordinary Muon steps at M ( Table 4 ). The fixed baseline saturates quickly. With and iterations it reaches the same validation loss, so more accurate orthogonalization brings no further gain. With only five iterations, our method reaches a lower loss than the fixed baseline at any depth, so adaptation can replace extra iterations. Figure 8: Training loss relative to the fixed baseline. Training loss minus the fixed baseline at in -step windows, where negative is better. 6 Conclusion The Newton–Schulz method does not need to treat the spectrum it acts on as unknown, because its iterations already produce measurements that can be reused to specialize its own computations. We use these measurements to select spectrum-adapted polynomial routines, improving approximation at fixed depth or reducing the iterations needed to reach a target accuracy. We evaluate the method on saved momentum spectra and in end-to-end GPT pretraining. Useful adaptation does not require recovering the spectrum exactly, only predicting which candidate routine will work well. Because the measurements come from matrices the iteration already forms and the fit works on a fixed number of scalars, this adaptation stays cheap at the matrix sizes of current frontier models, where computing exact spectra becomes expensive. References Ahn et al. (2025) K. Ahn, B. Xu, N. Abreu, Y. Fan, G. Magakyan, P. Sharma, Z. Zhan, and J. Langford Dion: distributed orthonormalized updates . arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.05295 . External Links: Link Cited by: Appendix G , §1 , §2.1 . Amsel et al. (2026a) N. Amsel, D. Persson, C. Musco, and R. M. Gower The Polar Express: optimal matrix sign methods and their application to the Muon algorithm . In International Conference on Learning Representations , External Links: Link Cited by: §A.2 , §F.3 , Appendix G , §1 , §2.1 , §2.2 , §2.2 , §2.2 , §5.1 . Amsel et al. (2026b) N. Amsel, J. Zhang, K. Ahn, A. Naeimi, A. Feng, B. Chen, T. Dao, and J. Langford Dion3: full-stack orthogonal updates . arXiv preprint arXiv:2608.11612 . External Links: Link Cited by: Appendix G . Anil et al. (2020) R. Anil, V. Gupta, T. Koren, K. Regan, and Y. Singer Scalable second order optimization for deep learning . arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.09018 . External Links: Link Cited by: §B.3 , Appendix E , §1 , §2.1 , §2.1 . Björck and Bowie (1971) Å. Björck and C. Bowie An iterative algorithm for computing the best estimate of an orthogonal matrix . SIAM Journal on Numerical Analysis 8 ( 2 ), pp. 358–364 . External Links: Document , Link Cited by: Appendix G , §2.2 . Braverman et al. (2022) V. Braverman, A. Krishnan, and C. Musco Sublinear time spectral density estimation . In Proceedings of the 54th Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing , pp. 1144–1157 . External Links: Document , Link Cited by: Appendix G , §4.3 . Chen and Chow (2014) J. Chen and E. Chow A stable scaling of Newton–Schulz for improving the sign function computation of a Hermitian matrix . Technical report Technical Report ANL/MCS-P5059-0114 , Argonne National Laboratory . External Links: Link Cited by: Appendix E , Appendix G , §2.2 . Chen et al. (2021) T. Chen, T. Trogdon, and S. Ubaru Analysis of stochastic Lanczos quadrature for spectrum approximation . In International Conference on Machine Learning , Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , Vol. 139 , pp. 1728–1739 . External Links: Link Cited by: Appendix G . Choudhury et al. (2026) S. Choudhury, X. Cheng, M. Takáč, S. Na, and M. Kolar Muon with Nesterov momentum: heavy-tailed noise and (randomized) inexact polar decomposition . arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.06884 . External Links: Link Cited by: Appendix G . DeepSeek-AI (2026) DeepSeek-AI DeepSeek-V4: towards highly efficient million-token context intelligence . arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.19348 . External Links: Link Cited by: Table 15 , §1 . Dev et al. (2026) B. Dev, S. Bohara, M. Takáč, and S. Horváth CacheMuon: using temporal preconditioning to approximate polar factor . arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.16371 . External Links: Link Cited by: Appendix G . Do et al. (2026) T. Do, S. Dereich, and A. Jentzen On MUON optimization: from non-convergence to an error analysis with Polar Express and the Newton–Schulz polynomial from implementations . arXiv preprint arXiv:2608.04607 . External Links: Link Cited by: Appendix G . Essential AI (2025) Essential AI Practical efficiency of Muon for pretraining . arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.02222 . External Links: Link Cited by: §1 . Fan et al. (2020) T. Fan, D. I. Shuman, S. Ubaru, and Y. Saad Spectrum-adapted polynomial approximation for matrix functions with applications in graph signal processing . Algorithms 13 ( 11 ), pp. 295 . External Links: Document , Link Cited by: Appendix G , §3.3 . GLM-5 Team (2026) GLM-5 Team GLM-5: from vibe coding to agentic engineering . arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.15763 . External Links: Link Cited by: Table 15 , §1 . Grishina et al. (2025) E. Grishina, M. Smirnov, and M. Rakhuba Accelerating Newton–Schulz iteration for orthogonalization via Chebyshev-type polynomials . arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.10935 . Note: Version 2 External Links: Link Cited by: §B.1 , Appendix E , Appendix E , Appendix G , §1 , §2.2 , §2.2 , §4.1 . Gupta et al. (2018) V. Gupta, T. Koren, and Y. Singer Shampoo: preconditioned stochastic tensor optimization . In International Conference on Machine Learning , Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , Vol. 80 , pp. 1842–1850 . External Links: Link Cited by: §1 , §2.1 , §2.1 . He et al. (2025) W. He, K. Han, H. Zhou, H. Chen, Z. Liu, X. Chen, and Y. Wang ROOT: robust orthogonalized optimizer for neural network training . arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.20626 . External Links: Link Cited by: Appendix G . Higham (1997) N. J. Higham Stable iterations for the matrix square root . Numerical Algorithms 15 ( 2 ), pp. 227–242 . External Links: Document , Link Cited by: Appendix E , Appendix G , §2.1 . Higham (2008) N. J. Higham Functions of matrices: theory and computation . SIAM . External Links: Document , Link Cited by: Appendix G , §1 , §2.1 . Jordan et al. (2024) K. Jordan, Y. Jin, V. Boza, J. You, F. Cesista, L. Newhouse, and J. Bernstein Muon: an optimizer for hidden layers in neural networks . Note: https://kellerjordan.github.io/posts/muon/ Blog post and implementation Cited by: §1 , §2.1 . Khaled et al. (2026) A. Khaled, K. Ozkara, T. Yu, M. Hong, and Y. Park MuonBP: faster Muon via block-periodic orthogonalization . In International Conference on Learning Representations , Note: arXiv:2510.16981 External Links: Link Cited by: Appendix G . Kim and Oh (2026) G. Y. Kim and M. Oh Convergence of Muon with Newton–Schulz . In International Conference on Learning Representations , External Links: Link Cited by: Appendix G . Kimi Team (2026) Kimi Team Kimi K3: open frontier intelligence . arXiv preprint arXiv:2607.24653 . External Links: Link Cited by: Table 15 , §1 . Kovarik (1970) Z. Kovarik Some iterative methods for improving orthonormality . SIAM Journal on Numerical Analysis 7 ( 3 ), pp. 386–389 . External Links: Document , Link Cited by: Appendix G , §2.2 . Krein and Nudel’man (1977) M. G. Krein and A. A. Nudel’man The Markov moment problem and extremal problems . Translations of Mathematical Monographs , Vol. 50 , American Mathematical Society , Providence, RI . External Links: Document Cited by: Appendix G , §4.3 . Lin et al. (2016) L. Lin, Y. Saad, and C. Yang Approximating spectral densities of large matrices . SIAM Review 58 ( 1 ), pp. 34–65 . External Links: Document , Link Cited by: Appendix G , §4.1 . Liu et al. (2025) J. Liu, J. Su, X. Yao, Z. Jiang, G. Lai, Y. Du, Y. Qin, W. Xu, E. Lu, J. Yan, Y. Chen, H. Zheng, Y. Liu, S. Liu, B. Yin, W. He, H. Zhu, Y. Wang, J. Wang, M. Dong, Z. Zhang, Y. Kang, H. Zhang, X. Xu, Y. Zhang, Y. Wu, X. Zhou, and Z. Yang Muon is scalable for LLM training . arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.16982 . External Links: Link Cited by: §1 , §2.1 . Loshchilov and Hutter (2019) I. Loshchilov and F. Hutter Decoupled weight decay regularization . In International Conference on Learning Representations , External Links: Link Cited by: §F.1 . Mead and Papanicolaou (1984) L. R. Mead and N. Papanicolaou Maximum entropy in the problem of moments . Journal of Mathematical Physics 25 ( 8 ), pp. 2404–2417 . External Links: Document , Link Cited by: Appendix G , §4.2 . NVIDIA (2025a) NVIDIA Nemotron-CC-v2 . Note: Dataset, https://huggingface.co/datasets/nvidia/Nemotron-CC-v2 Released August 18, 2025 Cited by: Table 18 , §5.2 . NVIDIA (2025b) NVIDIA NVIDIA Nemotron Nano 2: an accurate and efficient hybrid Mamba-Transformer reasoning model . arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.14444 . External Links: Link Cited by: Table 18 , §5.2 . Penedo et al. (2024) G. Penedo, H. Kydlíček, L. Ben allal, A. Lozhkov, M. Mitchell, C. Raffel, L. Von Werra, and T. Wolf The FineWeb datasets: decanting the web for the finest text data at scale . In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, Datasets and Benchmarks Track , Vol. 37 , pp. 30811–30849 . External Links: Link Cited by: §5.1 . Qi et al. (2026) X. Qi, M. Chen, J. Ye, Y. He, and R. Xiao Delving into Muon and beyond: deep analysis and extensions . In International Conference on Machine Learning , External Links: Link Cited by: §2.1 . Qian and Richtárik (2026) X. Qian and P. Richtárik Convergence analysis of Muon-type methods with inexact LMO in the degenerate case . arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.21581 . External Links: Link Cited by: Appendix G . Radford et al. (2019) A. Radford, J. Wu, R. Child, D. Luan, D. Amodei, and I. Sutskever Language models are unsupervised multitask learners . Technical report OpenAI . External Links: Link Cited by: §5.2 . Shulgin et al. (2026) E. Shulgin, S. AlRashed, F. Orabona, and P. Richtárik Beyond the ideal: analyzing the inexact Muon update . In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics , Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , Vol. 300 , pp. 5167–5175 . External Links: Link Cited by: Appendix G . Si et al. (2025) C. Si, D. Zhang, and W. Shen AdaMuon: adaptive Muon optimizer . arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.11005 . External Links: Link Cited by: §2.1 . Silver and Röder (1997) R. N. Silver and H. Röder Calculation of densities of states and spectral functions by Chebyshev recursion and maximum entropy . Physical Review E 56 ( 4 ), pp. 4822–4829 . External Links: Document , Link Cited by: Appendix G , §4.2 . Ubaru et al. (2017) S. Ubaru, J. Chen, and Y. Saad Fast estimation of via stochastic Lanczos quadrature . SIAM Journal on Matrix Analysis and Applications 38 ( 4 ), pp. 1075–1099 . External Links: Document , Link Cited by: Appendix G . Vyas et al. (2025) N. Vyas, D. Morwani, R. Zhao, I. Shapira, D. Brandfonbrener, L. Janson, and S. Kakade SOAP: improving and stabilizing Shampoo using Adam for language modeling . In International Conference on Learning Representations , External Links: Link Cited by: §1 , §2.1 , §2.1 . Weiße et al. (2006) A. Weiße, G. Wellein, A. Alvermann, and H. Fehske The kernel polynomial method . Reviews of Modern Physics 78 ( 1 ), pp. 275–306 . External Links: Document , Link Cited by: Appendix G , §4.1 . Yang et al. (2026) S. Yang, Z. Wang, O. Balabanov, N. B. Erichson, and M. W. Mahoney PRISM: distribution-free adaptive computation of matrix functions for accelerating neural network training . In International Conference on Machine Learning , External Links: Link Cited by: Appendix G , §1 . Zhang et al. (2026a) A. Zhang, B. Keigwin, D. Pai, and A. Dewulf Online KL Shampoo . Note: Tilde Research blog, https://blog.tilderesearch.com/blog/online-kl-shampoo Code: https://github.com/tilde-research/online-kl-shampoo-release Cited by: Appendix E , §F.1 , §1 , §2.1 , §5.2 . Zhang et al. (2026b) J. Zhang, N. Amsel, B. Chen, and T. Dao Gram Newton–Schulz: a fast, hardware-aware Newton–Schulz algorithm for Muon . Note: Dao AI Lab blogCode: https://github.com/Dao-AILab/gram-newton-schulz External Links: Link Cited by: Appendix G . Zhuang et al. (2026) X. Zhuang, P. Ouyang, Y. Li, J. Shi, Y. Chen, S. Liu, Y. Qian, W. Liu, H. Zhang, and I. Razzak AMO: adaptive Muon orthogonalization . arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.17806 . External Links: Link Cited by: §C.7 , Appendix G , §1 , §3.2 . Appendix A Proofs A.1 Proof of Proposition 1 For a thin SVD with orthonormal columns in and , . Applying this identity iteration by iteration gives Equation 2 . Proof. The eigenvalues of are , so . For symmetric , The final iterate satisfies . This proves Equation 9 . ∎ Singular values below the scoring cutoff. Let be the scoring cutoff, the scoring interval, and the fraction of singular values in it. For a full-row-rank input, the output is and the polar factor is , so (14) Our score covers only the first term. In the offline data, on average of attention singular values lie below the cutoff (median , at most ), and no MLP singular values do. For rank-deficient inputs the same decomposition holds with the partial polar factor, whose response is zero on zero singular values. A.2 Proof of Theorem 1 Proof. We first derive the recursion using the composition-optimality result of Amsel et al. (2026a, Theorem 3.1) . The change of variables maps a quintic on to one on , so the one-iteration optimum depends only on . If an optimal iteration has error , its image is by continuity and equioscillation. The next optimal error is therefore , which gives Equation 4 . For strict monotonicity, is a Haar space on every positive interval, so the minimax residual has four alternating extrema. Restricting a minimizer from to with removes the leftmost extremum, so it cannot remain minimax with the same error. Hence the one-iteration error is strictly decreasing in . Since is strictly decreasing, induction on gives strict monotonicity at every depth. For the lower bound, let be an odd polynomial of degree at most and . The case is immediate. Otherwise , and is a polynomial of degree at most with and . Mapping to and applying the Chebyshev extremal bound at the image of gives Because is increasing on and equals at , we get . A composition of quintics has degree at most , which proves Equation 5 . ∎ Consequently, reaching a uniform error on requires (15) A.3 Proof of Theorem 2 and accuracy of selection Proof. The set is a compact convex subset of the simplex, so the best-fit minimum in Equation 11 is attained, and its minimizer is feasible for the maximum-entropy problem. The feasible set of the latter is compact and convex, and entropy is continuous and strictly concave, so the fitted measure exists and is unique. Insert between the two integrals. The constant cancels because both measures have unit mass, so The first two terms are at most in absolute value, and the last is at most . Finally, . Adding the terms gives Equation 12 . ∎ From integrals to selection. The score in Equation 13 is the ratio of the error integral to the scored mass . Theorem 2 applies to each. If the estimates satisfy , , and , and on , then (16) Accurate scores give accurate selection. Write , let minimize the predicted squared error and the true one over the same candidates. If for every candidate, then (17) since . Appendix B Method details B.1 Input normalization For and , the Gram-power bound of Grishina et al. (2025, Section 3.3) is (18) and because . Rescaling does not change the polar factor. The first-iteration products give both the scale and the moments. If , then and , so each iteration-zero moment is a rescaled reduction of or . The same scale is used for the measurement pass, the spectral grid, and scoring. Figure 9 shows that this bound is nearly tight for every matrix type, unlike the Frobenius norm, and that better normalization alone accounts for only part of the gain from spectral selection. Figure 9: Normalization explains part of the gain. (a) Ratio of each upper bound to the largest singular value, by matrix type. (b) Fixed PE, fixed PE with the Gram-power scale (scaling only), and spectral estimation. B.2 Candidates and fitting Each candidate is a complete PE routine given by a design lower endpoint and a depth. Candidates are checked for positive iteration responses. For an iteration on , positivity reduces to the quadratic on , and the extreme outputs occur at the endpoints or at roots of . Candidates that fail are removed. The convex programs in Equation 11 use the row scaling with , which puts measurements of different magnitudes on a common scale. Each matrix is fitted independently. Table 5 lists all settings. Ambiguity of the fitted spectrum. Finitely many measurements can admit many spectral measures. Figure 10 constructs two grid measures that match the same measurements to numerical tolerance, the maximum-entropy fit and an extreme point of the feasible set. Their point masses differ substantially, but their cumulative distributions nearly coincide, so spectral averages such as the RMS score are similar under both ( Theorem 2 ). Maximum entropy selects one representative among the feasible measures. Figure 10: Different spectral measures can match the same measurements. Maximum-entropy and extreme-point grid measures for representative attention and MLP spectra. The top row shows the mass on the estimator grid and the bottom row the conditional CDF on the scoring interval. Table 5: Estimator and candidate settings. Component Setting Scale , rounded up to the grid , Scoring cutoff in Frobenius-normalized coordinates Spectral grid zero, points below the cutoff, in the scoring interval Measurements four moments per iteration ( – ) and the final second moment Entropy tolerance Row-scale floor Solver CVXPY with Clarabel Design lower endpoints log-spaced values in Candidate depths Remez tolerance / iteration cap / Endpoint cushion Coefficient safety scale before the final iteration Positivity margin B.3 Periodic measurement Periodic recomputation in the background is a standard way to amortize preconditioner updates ( Anil et al., 2020 ) . Algorithm 1 applies it here. A measurement pass produces the current update and the measurements, and fitting and selection run in the background while the previous routine stays in use. Algorithm 1 Periodic spectral estimation. 1: Period , measurement routine of depth , candidate set, selection rule 2: Use for every matrix 3: for optimizer steps do 4: Form the current momenta and their normalization 5: if a finished fit is available then 6: Switch to the newly selected routines 7: end if 8: if a measurement is due and no fit is running then 9: Run , record the moments, and use its output for the update 10: Start fitting and selection in the background 11: else 12: Apply the current routines 13: end if 14: end for If steps between measurements use mean depth , the average number of iterations per step is (19) Appendix C Offline experiments C.1 Data We use Muon momentum matrices saved during a FineWeb run of a small GPT model ( Table 6 ). The held-out run ( Section C.4 ) and Figure 3 use the M Muon baseline of our pretraining experiments ( Appendix F ). Table 6: Offline data. Primary run Held-out run Dataset FineWeb Nemotron-CC v2 High-Quality Model layers, width layers, width ( M Muon baseline) Checkpoints every steps, k– k step , then every steps to Matrices attention, MLP Matrix types Q, K, V, O, MLP up, MLP gate, MLP down Muon momentum C.2 Fitted spectra across layers and training Figures 11 and 12 compare the fitted and SVD spectra for every matrix type, across layers and across training. The fits follow the SVD spectra closely throughout. Figure 11: Fitted and SVD spectra across layers (step k), with the SVD in grey and the moment fit in purple. Both are restricted to and smoothed in . The numbers give the largest gap between the two CDFs. Figure 12: Fitted and SVD spectra across training (layer ). Same conventions as Figure 11 . C.3 Fixed-depth errors and the choice of score Table 8 extends Table 2 to all depths and adds the RMS oracle, which selects by exact RMS error. The minimax oracle, used as the oracle throughout the paper, selects by exact worst-case error. On attention matrices spectral estimation nearly matches the RMS oracle, and on MLP matrices it is close at shallow depths. It has lower RMS error than the minimax oracle on attention through and on MLP through , and higher worst-case error. We score candidates by RMS error because the fitted spectrum can predict it. RMS error is an average over the spectrum, which Theorem 2 covers. Worst-case error depends on the extreme scored singular values, which finitely many moments do not determine. Table 7 instead applies the minimax rule to the fitted spectrum, on the interval that keeps all but of the fitted mass in each tail. Against its own oracle, it has much larger regret than the RMS rule has against the RMS oracle, and it misses about a fifth of the MLP accuracy targets, compared with at most for the RMS rule. Table 7: Scoring rules on the fitted spectrum. Regret is the mean error of the selected routine minus that of the matching oracle, in the rule’s own criterion (worst-case error for minimax, RMS error for ours). Misses are the share of MLP matrices whose true error exceeds under the target rule. Regret MLP misses (%) Attention MLP Rule on the fit Minimax RMS (ours) Table 8: Fixed-depth RMS and worst-case error. Means over attention and MLP matrices. Oracle is the minimax oracle, and the RMS oracle selects by exact RMS error. All methods use the same candidates and scoring interval. RMS error Worst-case error Fixed PE Ours Oracle RMS oracle Fixed PE Ours Oracle Attention MLP C.4 Held-out run We apply the method unchanged to the held-out run ( Table 9 ). On attention matrices spectral estimation stays close to the RMS oracle and well below fixed PE, and on this run it also has lower worst-case error than fixed PE. On MLP matrices it stays far below fixed PE, while the minimax oracle is lower in both errors. Table 9: Held-out run. Mean errors over all checkpoints with unchanged settings. Oracle is the minimax oracle. RMS error Worst-case error Fixed PE Ours Oracle RMS oracle Fixed PE Ours Oracle Attention MLP C.5 Ablations Measurements. Figure 13 fits the spectrum from fewer measurements, either from only the first iterations of the measurement pass or with fewer moment orders per iteration. More iterations and more orders both help, mostly on MLP matrices. Scoring cutoff. Figure 14 repeats the offline comparison with lower scoring cutoffs. A lower cutoff includes more of the small-singular-value tail and makes the problem harder for every method. Estimator settings. Table 10 changes one setting at a time. Attention results are insensitive to all of them. On MLP matrices at , a small positive entropy tolerance, , gives the lowest error, and we use for all experiments. Figure 13: Fewer measurements. The left and center columns use measurements from only the first iterations of the measurement pass, and the right column fewer moment orders at every iteration. Colors give , the scoring cutoff and smallest design endpoint. Solid lines show spectral estimation and dashed lines the RMS oracle. Figure 14: Lower scoring cutoffs. Each row repeats Figure 7 with the RMS oracle at the cutoff shown on the left. Panels (a–b) show RMS error at fixed depth and (c–d) the mean depth at target , capped at the largest allowed depth (dotted). At the lower cutoffs, almost no attention matrix meets within the cap, for either method. Table 10: Estimator settings. Mean RMS error of the selected routine, changing one setting at a time. RMS-oracle rows use the corresponding candidate set. Setting Value Attn Attn MLP MLP Default Table 5 0.472 0.0431 0.00694 0.00101 Entropy tolerance (best fit only) 0.472 0.0437 0.00729 0.000622 0.472 0.0430 0.00684 0.000777 0.472 0.0434 0.00862 0.00140 0.472 0.0439 0.0131 0.00216 Grid, scoring interval 60 0.472 0.0435 0.0199 0.00223 240 0.472 0.0437 0.00870 0.00161 Grid, below cutoff 12 0.472 0.0434 0.00696 0.00112 48 0.472 0.0430 0.00692 0.000978 Endpoints per decade 6 0.473 0.0445 0.00672 0.00105 24 0.472 0.0429 0.00704 0.000986 RMS oracle 6 per decade 0.473 0.0437 0.00346 12 per decade 0.472 0.0424 0.00330 24 per decade 0.472 0.0422 0.00326 C.6 Target rule The target rule picks the shortest candidate whose predicted RMS error is at most . Table 11 adds a safety margin by requiring the prediction to be at most . On attention matrices the predictions are accurate, and a small margin removes every miss at little extra depth. On MLP matrices a small fraction of matrices miss the target even with a large margin. These are MLP-down matrices with a few isolated singular values far below the rest of the spectrum. Each such value adds a large error, and the moments do not detect it. Table 11: Target rule with a safety margin . A candidate is accepted if its predicted RMS error is at most . Misses are the fraction of matrices whose true RMS error exceeds . Mean depth Misses (%) Attn MLP Attn MLP Max error 1 7.91 4.23 1.9 0.0 1.5 8.19 4.44 0.0 0.0 10 9.00 6.09 0.0 0.0 RMS oracle 7.83 4.02 0.0 0.0 1 9.00 6.09 0.0 5.7 1.5 9.00 6.27 0.0 4.4 10 9.00 7.31 0.0 2.4 RMS oracle 8.99 4.85 0.0 0.0 1 9.68 7.31 0.1 5.4 1.5 9.77 7.52 0.0 5.0 10 9.91 7.97 0.0 1.9 RMS oracle 9.55 5.36 0.0 0.0 C.7 Reuse and per-type selection Table 12 evaluates each saved matrix with a design endpoint chosen at an earlier checkpoint, while recomputing its normalization. Reusing older choices changes the error very little, and every variant stays far below fixed PE. Table 13 compares per-matrix selection with one fixed endpoint per matrix type, chosen with exact SVD errors on early checkpoints, in the spirit of AMO ( Zhuang et al., 2026 ) . The per-type choice needs exact SVDs from the same run and depends on which checkpoints are used to choose it. Spectral estimation needs neither, has lower error at both depths, and gains most at larger depth, where layers of the same type differ. Grouping would also help in mixture-of-experts models with many expert matrices. Because the moments are averages over the spectrum, averaging the measurements of a group gives the moments of its pooled spectrum, so one fit can serve the whole group. Table 12: Reusing earlier choices. Mean RMS error on checkpoints from step k. Columns give the checkpoint whose choice is used, namely the current one, the previous one, the first one, or one updated only at every fourth checkpoint. Oracle is the minimax oracle. Current Previous First Every fourth RMS oracle Oracle Fixed PE 5 8 Table 13: Per-type versus per-matrix selection. Mean RMS error on the later checkpoints ( k– k), with the per-type endpoints chosen on the earlier ones. Oracle is the minimax oracle. Per type Ours RMS oracle Oracle 5 8 Appendix D Cost For with , one quintic iteration costs multiply–adds. The reductions of and add about , a fraction of an iteration, and use only matrices the iteration already holds. The fit and the scoring work on a fixed number of measurements and a fixed grid, so their cost does not depend on the matrix size, and they run on the CPU. Table 14 compares these costs with those of exact spectra. Figures 15 and 15 report GPU times on one H200 for random square and wide matrices and for matrix shapes of recent models trained with Muon. The reductions take between and ms at every tested size, and the fit takes ms of CPU time per matrix. The Newton–Schulz pass and the exact spectrum grow with the matrix. The reductions and the fit run once every steps, and the -iteration measurement pass replaces one -iteration pass ( Equation 19 ). For a model with hidden matrices, this adds of GPU time, iterations, and of CPU time per step, where and are the per-matrix times above. For our B Muon model ( , , , about s per step), this is under ms of reductions, iterations, and ms of CPU time per step. Table 14: Added cost of each spectrum estimator for , . One Newton–Schulz iteration costs . Method Extra products Work that grows with Fixed work Ours none per iteration fit, scoring SVD (singular values) – – Gram eigenvalues – Figure 15: GPU time per matrix versus matrix size (one H200, median). Ours denotes the compiled reductions. Circles mark square matrices, triangles wide matrices, and diamonds the matrices of Table 15 . The Newton–Schulz pass runs in bf16, and the SVD and the Gram eigenvalues in fp32. Matrices are random Gaussian. Table 15: Matrix shapes of recent models trained with Muon ( DeepSeek-AI, 2026 ; GLM-5 Team, 2026 ; Kimi Team, 2026 ) and GPU time per matrix in milliseconds (one H200, median). The NS pass runs ten bf16 iterations, ours is the compiled reductions, and the last two columns compute the eigenvalues of and the singular values. The DeepSeek-V4 attention output is the second matrix of its grouped output projection. Model Matrix Shape NS pass Ours Gram eig. SVD DeepSeek-V4 routed expert attention output GLM-5 attention output dense FFN Kimi K3 attention output dense FFN Appendix E Inverse square roots For a positive-definite matrix scaled to have spectrum in , consider the coupled iteration ( Higham, 1997 ; Anil et al., 2020 ) (20) which computes and is used in dense preconditioners, including the scaled CANS construction of Online KL Shampoo ( Grishina et al., 2025 ; Zhang et al., 2026a ) . Proposition 2 (Scalar recursion of the coupled iteration) . For an eigenvalue of , let be the corresponding eigenvalue of and . In exact arithmetic, (21) and the eigenvalue of is . Thus follows the same scalar recursion as in the polar case, and is the relative inverse-root error. Proof. All iterates are polynomials in and commute, and induction gives . The eigenvalue of is therefore , so , and multiplying by gives Equation 21 . ∎ With , reductions of matrices the iteration already forms measure the functions in Table 16 , so the method of the polar case carries over. For , the odd cubic minimizing is (22) where is the interior extremum of the error. This is the cubic iteration behind scaled Newton–Schulz and CANS ( Chen and Chow, 2014 ; Grishina et al., 2025 ) , and it defines our cubic candidates. Table 16: Measurements from the coupled iteration. Each function is averaged over the distribution of . Reduction Function , , , , , , , , , , We test the extension on regularized momentum Gram matrices from the primary run ( Table 17 ). Figure 16 shows that selecting a cubic routine from the fitted spectrum improves on the fixed cubic routine at every depth, with the largest gains on the more concentrated spectra. Figure 16: Inverse square roots. Mean relative RMS error on regularized momentum Gram matrices for the fixed cubic routine, spectral estimation, and the RMS oracle over the same candidates. Table 17: Inverse-root test settings. Component Setting Test matrices , Endpoints , log-spaced in Candidate depths Grid one low point, log-spaced Entropy tolerance Measurement depth ( ) or ( ) Appendix F Pretraining details F.1 Setup The model and optimizer follow Zhang et al. (2026a) . Table 18 lists the model, data, and training settings, and Table 19 the hidden-matrix optimizer settings, which are shared across model sizes. The hidden matrices of each layer (attention Q, K, V, O and MLP up, gate, down) use Muon or OKLS, while embeddings, the output head, normalization gains, and attention-gate projections use AdamW ( Loshchilov and Hutter, 2019 ) . The data order is the same for every run. Each evaluation reads the next window of a held-out shard, the same window for every run. A hidden weight of shape is initialized as , embeddings as , and the untied output head at zero, so hidden gradients vanish at the first step. The learning rate warms up linearly, stays constant, and decays linearly to zero over the final fraction of training. For Muon, with gradient , where is computed by the routine under study. Because the output is rescaled to a fixed norm, routines differ only in the direction of the update. For OKLS, with the previous inverse-root factors , The factors are symmetrized, their inverse roots are recomputed every step, and The factors start from scaled and of the first nonzero gradient. Compared with the OKLS setup, we hold the tokenizer, head dimension, MLP expansion ratio, attention gate, initialization, and AdamW parameter group fixed across model sizes, train for slightly fewer steps, and use Polar Express instead of CANS for Muon. Table 18: Model and training settings. Setting M M B Layers / width / / / Query heads / KV heads / / / Head dimension / MLP width / / / Non-embedding / total params M / M M / M M / M Attention / MLP grouped-query attention with a per-head sigmoid gate / SwiGLU Normalization / positions pre-RMSNorm and final RMSNorm ( ) / RoPE ( ) Data Nemotron-CC v2 High-Quality ( NVIDIA, 2025a ; NVIDIA, 2025b ) Tokenizer / vocabulary tiiuae/falcon-7b / Context / sequences per step / ( tokens) Steps / warmup ( B tokens) / Validation held-out tokens every steps AdamW (non-hidden params) lr , , , no weight decay Precision bf16 autocast, fp32 weights and optimizer state Clipping / dropout / z-loss none Table 19: Hidden-matrix optimizer settings. The decay coefficient enters as . Setting Muon OKLS Peak learning rate Momentum or Factor decay – Factor diagonal shift – Weight decay Initialization scale Decay fraction Matrix-function precision bf16 fp32 F.2 Matrix-function routines Muon. The routines use the normalization, candidates, and fitting of Sections B.1 and B.2 with the settings in Tables 5 and 20 . The fixed baseline is at the run’s depth. The oracle recomputes the minimax choice from an exact SVD every steps and uses the fixed baseline until its first choice. Spectral estimation also starts from the fixed baseline. Every steps it runs the measurement pass, which also produces that step’s update, fits the moments on the CPU, and uses the selected routine until the next measurement. If a fit fails, the previous routine is kept. Our runs also record exact spectra at each measurement to measure selection quality ( Section F.4 ), and these records never enter selection. OKLS. The inverse roots use the coupled iteration of Appendix E , scaled by an upper bound on the largest eigenvalue, in fp32 because the coupled iteration drifts in bf16. The measurements include all traces, squared norms, and inner products of , , and of the products the iteration already forms ( Table 16 ), and those involving add information about small eigenvalues. The fixed baseline uses the cubic routine designed for eigenvalues above . An exact eigendecomposition every steps only updates , which, like the Frobenius norm in PE, bounds the scaled spectrum by one, while the relative lower endpoint stays at . Comparisons. We use throughout, and Section F.3 also reports . Figure 8 averages the training-loss gaps over short windows. Table 20: Pretraining routine settings. Muon OKLS Scoring cutoff (relative) Candidates PE endpoints in at the run’s depth cubic, endpoints per decade in , at the run’s depth Measurement pass iterations, measurements iterations, measurements Measurement period ( also at M and M) ( also at M and M) Fixed baseline cubic routine for eigenvalues above Oracle minimax choice from the exact spectrum every steps Solver Clarabel in float64 on CPU, tolerance , one retry at F.3 Additional pretraining results Measurement period. Table 21 compares , used throughout, with , which we also ran at M and M. Both periods improve on the fixed baseline in every configuration, and neither is better in all of them. Table 21: Measurement period. Final validation loss of our method with and . Optimizer Size Fixed Muon 160M Muon 300M OKLS 160M OKLS 300M Practitioner endpoint. The default Polar Express routine ( Amsel et al., 2026a ) is designed for , a narrower interval than the of our fixed baseline. Table 22 compares both fixed routines with our method at . The less conservative endpoint improves slightly on the fixed baseline at M and matches it at M, and per-matrix selection improves on both. Table 22: Practitioner endpoint. Muon, , final validation loss. Size Ours (baseline) (default) 160M 300M F.4 Selection quality during training At every measurement we also recorded exact spectra and compared the chosen routine with the RMS oracle on the same spectra ( Table 23 ). The error of spectral estimation is close to the oracle’s and far below the fixed baseline’s. Figure 17 breaks this down by matrix type. On attention Q and O, the minimax rule picks much smaller endpoints than the RMS rule, because it protects the worst direction. On the other matrix types spectral estimation picks smaller, more conservative endpoints than the RMS oracle. Table 24 repeats the selection on saved training matrices and varies two things separately. Across columns, measured moments, in bf16 for Muon and fp32 for OKLS, give nearly the same selection quality as exact ones. Across rows, the OKLS reductions involving and matter, since traces and norms of alone give clearly worse choices. Table 23: Selection quality during training. Agreement is the share of measurements where spectral estimation picks the RMS oracle’s endpoint, distance the median gap between the two endpoints in decades, regret our RMS error minus the RMS oracle’s, and the number of matrix or factor measurements. M runs. Endpoint RMS error Optimizer Agreement (%) Distance Fixed RMS oracle Ours Regret Muon 4 200 3,864 58.6 0.00 0.6681 0.2226 0.2254 0.0028 Muon 4 500 1,512 61.1 0.00 0.6603 0.2194 0.2219 0.0025 Muon 5 200 3,864 27.3 0.25 0.6359 0.0967 0.1066 0.0099 Muon 5 500 1,512 28.2 0.25 0.6322 0.0724 0.0828 0.0104 OKLS 5 200 4,704 77.8 0.00 0.6267 0.2390 0.2394 0.0004 OKLS 5 500 2,016 73.8 0.00 0.6149 0.2226 0.2232 0.0006 Figure 17: Selection by matrix type (Muon M, , ). (a) Mean RMS error on the recorded exact spectra. (b) Median design endpoint chosen by spectral estimation and by both oracles on the same spectra. Table 24: Moment precision and measurement set. Mean regret against the RMS oracle on saved training matrices. Columns compare moments computed exactly with moments measured during the pass (bf16 for Muon, fp32 for OKLS), and rows the reductions used. The exact columns cover Muon matrices and OKLS factors, and the measured ones and . Optimizer Reductions Count Exact Measured Muon all OKLS all OKLS only Appendix G Related work Polynomial iterations for matrix functions. Newton–Schulz iterations compute the polar factor using only matrix products ( Björck and Bowie, 1971 ; Kovarik, 1970 ; Higham, 2008 ) , and coupled versions compute inverse square roots ( Higham, 1997 ) . Later work improves the polynomials. Scaled Newton–Schulz speeds up convergence ( Chen and Chow, 2014 ) , Polar Express designs each iteration by minimax approximation on a spectral interval ( Amsel et al., 2026a ) , and CANS uses Chebyshev-type designs ( Grishina et al., 2025 ) . These routines need the spectral interval in advance and typically use the same one for every matrix. Our method keeps these polynomial families and chooses the interval and depth from the spectrum of the matrices being processed. Other work makes each orthogonalization cheaper. Gram Newton–Schulz iterates on the smaller Gram matrix with symmetric products ( Zhang et al., 2026b ) , Dion and Dion3 reduce communication in distributed training ( Ahn et al., 2025 ; Amsel et al., 2026b ) , MuonBP orthogonalizes blocks between full steps ( Khaled et al., 2026 ) , and CacheMuon reuses work from earlier steps ( Dev et al., 2026 ) . These methods lower the cost of an iteration or of a step, whereas spectral estimation chooses which iterations to run and can be combined with them. Adapting the iteration to the matrix. ROOT tailors coefficients to the matrix dimensions ( He et al., 2025 ) . AMO observes spectra early in training and then fixes one routine per matrix type ( Zhuang et al., 2026 ) , and Section C.7 compares per-matrix selection with this kind of per-type choice. PRISM fits the polynomial to the current spectrum at every iteration using randomized sketches ( Yang et al., 2026 ) . Unlike these works, we read the spectral information from products that Newton–Schulz already forms, without random probes, and use it to choose a complete routine for later steps. Inexact orthogonalization. Analyses of Muon with inexact orthogonalization relate the approximation error to convergence and to the choice of learning rate and momentum ( Shulgin et al., 2026 ; Kim and Oh, 2026 ; Choudhury et al., 2026 ; Qian and Richtárik, 2026 ; Do et al., 2026 ) . Spectral estimation reduces this error at a fixed number of iterations. Spectral density estimation from moments. Estimating a spectral density from traces of matrix polynomials is standard in numerical linear algebra. The kernel polynomial method ( Weiße et al., 2006 ) , stochastic Lanczos quadrature ( Ubaru et al., 2017 ; Chen et al., 2021 ) , and related methods ( Lin et al., 2016 ) estimate these traces with random probe vectors, and maximum-entropy fits turn a few moments into a density ( Mead and Papanicolaou, 1984 ; Silver and Röder, 1997 ) . Fan et al. (2020) use such estimates to adapt polynomial approximations to the spectrum, which is close in spirit to our selection step. Finitely many moments do not identify a distribution ( Krein and Nudel’man, 1977 ) , but they determine averages of functions that the measured polynomials approximate well ( Braverman et al., 2022 ) , and our prediction theorem applies this to the moments that Newton–Schulz produces. Here the moments are traces of matrices the iteration already forms, so they need neither probe vectors nor extra matrix products. Experimental support, please view the build logs for errors. Generated by L A T E xml . Instructions for reporting errors We are continuing to improve HTML versions of papers, and your feedback helps enhance accessibility and mobile support. To report errors in the HTML that will help us improve conversion and rendering, choose any of the methods listed below: Click the "Report Issue" ( ) button, located in the page header. Tip: You can select the relevant text first, to include it in your report. Our team has already identified the following issues . We appreciate your time reviewing and reporting rendering errors we may not have found yet. Your efforts will help us improve the HTML versions for all readers, because disability should not be a barrier to accessing research. Thank you for your continued support in championing open access for all. Have a free development cycle? Help support accessibility at arXiv! Our collaborators at LaTeXML maintain a list of packages that need conversion , and welcome developer contributions . We gratefully acknowledge support from our major funders , member institutions , , and all contributors. About · Help · Contact · Subscribe · Copyright · Privacy · Accessibility · Operational Status (opens in new tab) Major funding support from